Can the golden child turn into the scapegoat? And here is what one of our community members said. I'm not proud of it, but I used to be my mom's golden child. Everything I did was praised. Now I can't do anything and it feels I've become the scapegoat. What causes this switch in narcissistic families and why does it happen? , wonderful question. I want people to think about how the nature of a narcissist is never consistent. Part of their presentation is to be inconsistent. And the method or the reasoning for that is to keep everyone destabilized and always trying to pursue that approval piece, that sense of stability or consistency. what I to think of is if the narcissist is always inconsistent to create chaos, the child is in some way trying to figure out how to maintain something that feels predictable, consistent. It's a way of them regulating their own mood or the mood of the narcissist. again, going back to, if they've been feeling the golden child, they're celebrated, everything they do is quite meaningful for the narcissist, , that makes them feel good. But that doesn't really have the longevity the narcissist would maybe want them to have because the narcissist is still looking for a way to get their own needs met, which means if the golden child is achieving all of these things, in a way, the narcissist isn't really getting their supply. It's only as good as it's good. if the things are being achieved, there still is this potential unsettling energy within the narcissist because they need to create chaos. They need to create a sense of that power dynamic. And it does them no good in a way to just let a child settle into a role. They want to cause a bit of a disruption in that role that it destabilizes the child. And I'm saying even an adult child. I'm just using that as the term of the child, of course, to then feel a little uncomfortable that they weren't good enough. Something has happened. How did they lose favor? They lost the narcissist. once they realize something is going on and they're being ridiculed, they're being devalued, it has the potential to reignite that energy of going after something a little bit more and making the narcissist be kind of reminded, I still can control you. I'm still able to destabilize you and cause you to lose sense of who you are and still depend on me and what my approval is, what my needs are to still be the main, I guess, focus. And I think that's the key to the relationship. . you're saying golden child definitely can turn into the scapegoat. And the reason that this can, this switch can happen or what causes this switch is because the inconsistency piece that you just said that the very nature within narcissistic individuals is this inconsistency. And it also enforces their control when they kind of can disrupt the family dynamics and everybody is very, insecure about their stance there. And , that causes it. I was also kind of thinking about myself before this meeting with you today. Is this a separate thing or does this go under what you just said, but loss of idealization? because golden child, if you think about it, represents kind of the narcissist in a positive view, , , , I mean, because you speak at the same time. does the measurement though make sense isn't it? Does it make sense, in that way? , I see you already Ineuse it is. But when I see in zoom, but. Yes, Sit back. I guess, he's going to be over there in a second and. I may be going for Fuck the PowerPoint more. But. don't subscribe platinum chat wedding. And let's say I, alpha Congressman they were. , the golden. . the Golden Child loses their kind of aquele porsche, kind of this favorite favorite role because they no longer meet the narcissistic parents unrealistic expectations they let's say they make a mistake or they do not succeed in a way that flatters the narcissistic parent anymore and this happens because they have kind of idealized they see themselves through the child they have idealized image of themselves and through the golden child and when the golden child fails they feel almost betrayed how can you fail exactly when i've already been encouraged or i felt i had the attention and the positive reinforcement from the narcissistic parent what happened but yes absolutely i mean again i go back to what the narcissist needs which is not to feel anyone else understands any predictability and what they're looking for it really always comes back to it's never going to be enough it will never ever be enough it does set up a child as you just said to feel i've always done everything i thought what happened that i fell out of favor why did i do that what happened to me what happened to me what happened to me what happened to me what happened to me what happened to me what happened to me what happened to me why was that not good enough when it was good enough yesterday it was always something i i don't know if i should use an example or not but i just quickly i remember talking to a client once that talked about how everything was always perfect and they were always making sure everything was perfect and one day out of the blue something they did that they had always done they just found one little criticism to judge them and it really unraveled them and caused them to feel again confused and lost and critical of themselves and very guilty and very shame-based because just one small thing it wasn't even anything in my opinion meaningful but enough to let that person i think that's what you're saying to feel i thought i had it figured out and was this was this client of yours golden child usually yes at the time because those roles but at the time again it was their own ability to feel they had mastered what they thought they needed because they meant it was safe and everything was achieved and they felt connected and they felt the predictability of what they needed and they felt the predictability of what they needed to feel connection to the narcissist again it's just it's just part of the game of a narcissist you will never perhaps ever really feel that consistency in any of the roles that you think you need to be in order to maintain a connection it doesn't work for the narcissist they still need to in some way destabilize you to keep that power differential in place and cause you to feel you're losing your mind i think that's a good ad because i believe it might be sometimes kind of common misconception that oh it's a global problem and i think that's a good idea to have a golden child and then you're oh it's a golden child or a golden child is always a golden child scapegoat is always the scapegoat but in reality they're actually very fluid ever changing creating that uncertainty it's the chaos and the drama of the family and those roles move very quickly sometimes they're not quick maybe they're not as noticeable and they might be a little more gradual and then all of a sudden you realize something shifted and then other families depending on the energy of the narcissist because we know it's on a continuum those roles might switch very quickly causing even more chaos within the family system and uncertainty of who am i in this system are you saying to simplify to be the more narcissistic the person is on the others on the continuum the more likely it is that the roles shift even faster is that what you say sometimes that mood energy from the narcissist if they are very temperamental because narcissists show up a little bit differently i don't want to get too off the topic there but again i don't think it's it's good for people to think maybe a one-size-fits-all when we're talking about the word narcissist because that word is flung out in many different conversations now i think you still need to understand there's some general common pieces to it but if you have a very temperamental narcissist who is even more likely to erupt or to be to shift that mood because some are a little more sullen they're a little more victimized they're a little more of that depressed piece people might be able to manage some of that mood a little bit better but if they're very active on a more regular basis then that can cause maybe those roles to be a little more shifting fast because that energy feels more threatening that actually makes me think of this one idea that I came across that also kind of stress can intensify those role changes because narcissists they are very unable to regulate their emotions then they lash out to whoever is closest it doesn't matter if it's a golden child but if there's someone else in that moment and they can't deal with whatever they can just offload their frustration no matter if it's the golden child or scapegoat that might also and that probably creates a lot of confusion for their child because they might not have done anything they have thought that they are now it's been very good season I'm kind of doing everything then something happens and it's actually caused by the parents inability to regulate their emotions and something happens and they can't handle it and they just are very frustrated and the thing I was also going to mention based on what you said is if you think about a child who's an only child in a narcissistic family then obviously they are prone to serve many roles depending on what is going on that's an example of maybe a person understanding maybe it does get confusing if you've got multiple siblings that are have different roles within the family but one child can equally flip-flop into different roles depending on what the narcissist needs they can be valued and then devalued very quickly and I think that again one of the hallmarks of a narcissist is they are attracted to something that they want to boast about because you're an extension of them for a while it can be that they're going to really celebrate you but they cannot tolerate feeling somebody deserves that kind of treatment because it goes against their fragile ego that's why also there would be an intolerance of maybe celebrating a person too much because they aren't strong enough to manage I'm good and are you no if I'm saying you're good and you're perfect at all these things that's starting to threaten my own sense of who I am I've got to remind myself of how you are all of them you have a sense of it's not I don't know or either that's a real risk to you it's a real risk to an adult it's not I don't know how to go about it if you're an adult or if you're an adult and you are also capable of not being as good as I'm telling you are, because I have to reclaim some sense of my own inner security in myself. I'll devalue you to remind myself how good I am at your expense. . Because I can't do it on my own. . . now to conclude, if the question is , can the golden child turn into the scapegoat? Short answer, yes. And then how would you summarize, , what causes this switch? And why does it happen? If you had to make a tweet about this. Oh, good God. I think the tweet would just simply be something along the line of narcissists aren't consistent because their egos will not tolerate consistency. They're too susceptible. they need to create confusion and chaos. They can't let you feel safe. That's it. . You're never going to feel safe. it's going to shift all the time. . . Thank you. That was good. .