Money is one of the biggest pain points for people. They have stories from their past that created wounds and traumas and limiting beliefs that then dictate their behaviors. My money story was tied to stress and chaos because my parents frequently, they were stressed out, screaming at each other, slamming doors, and it just seemed to tie into a sense of lack. Most people wanna make easy money, but they don't know how to make money easy. And my vision was to go and interview some of the world's most financially successful individuals who also have inner peace and abundance around money and also understand the dynamics of trauma around money, the wounds around money, our belief system around money. You gotta heal the money story to create a new belief system for yourself that something is possible. Lewis Howes is a New York Times bestselling author, keynote speaker, and host of one of the biggest podcasts in the world with over a billion downloads, The School of Greatness. Lewis is a former two-sport All-American athlete and former professional football player. And now he's focused on teaching people to transform their relationship with money. Struggles with our finances have a huge impact on our mental health, our physical health, our relationships, the list goes on and on. And in fact, I pulled this up because I knew you were coming in here. A study cited in the Journal of Family and Economic Issues found that financial worries are a leading cause of psychological distress. And I'm gonna talk about that in a minute. But I'm gonna talk about the psychological distress in our society today, which you already know. A meta-analysis, and this was published just in 2022 in PLOS One, determined that financial stress and depression are intimately linked. All , this is something that is impacting our lives, whether we understand it, whether we realize it, whether we it or not. And yet we are not educated about this. And I'm curious what inspired you to make this, your topic of focus, with all the things that you've done, and what inspired you to make this your topic of focus, with all the things that you've done, and what inspired you to make this your topic of focus, to have expertise in. This is something very unique. Why did you choose to get people educated on this? My whole vision and mission is to help people heal and create wholeness within them. And as I went on my own healing journey of healing relationships, but also just my traumas as a child, I realized that was causing me to act out in certain ways based on these wounds, based on the story that I had from my past. It caused me to choose certain relationships I was in. It caused me to be anxious in certain moments. It caused me to be more reactive and defensive in certain moments. And I realized, oh, , this story that I have, my history, shaped my belief system. The things I saw, my environment, my experiences, the things I did to other people, the things other people did to me, it shaped a belief. And those beliefs shaped my behaviors. When I was triggered, when I was excited, I would behave in a certain way. And those behaviors created my outcome, my results. But more importantly, the feelings I had based on the results was something I always wanted to understand. Because as an athlete, I think you can relate to this, when I would accomplish my goals, I was very goal-oriented and I would accomplish them, but I wouldn't feel good afterwards. I was always , why am I not happy with the results I'm creating, even though these are massive dreams that I have? And then I started to realize how to heal past wounds that were causing me to be driven, these behaviors, to drive me to achieve without feeling fulfilled. And I started to learn how to heal I could be fulfilled in the journey and in the success that I would have, or the failures that I would have. And just you said, I'm glad you shared these stats, money is one of the biggest pain points for people. And my goal is to bring people healing and create wholeness within them. And yes, we wanna live extraordinary lives. We wanna be healthier in all these different facets of life. We wanna have beautiful relationships. We wanna have a healthy relationship. But I just noticed after the last 12 years of doing all the content I do, a pillar of my content is around money. And there was just much pain and confusion around understanding the relationship to money. Most people wanna make easy money, but they don't know how to make money easy. Most people, money is hard for them. It's stressful. It's, they don't even wanna pay attention to it because they don't understand it. They have stories from their past that created wounds and traumas. And limiting beliefs that then dictate their behaviors and influence their behavior around money in their life. If you ask people how much money they have in their bank account, they probably have no clue. If you ask them how much debt do you have, they might have at a ballpark, but they really don't know. Most people are avoidant and they don't have a healthy relationship with it. And my vision in part of this book in this process was to go and interview some of the world's most financially successful individuals who also have inner peace and abundance around money. money. And also understand the dynamics of trauma around money, the wounds around money, our belief system around money. And when we have an environment where our nervous system is reactive or anxious or scarce around money, it's typically going to dictate our environment externally with money as . When we receive it, when we spend it, how we feel. And I noticed this with most of my life. I got really good at making money at a certain point after years of struggling, being broke, living on my sister's couch for a while, not thinking I would ever make money. Then I obsessed about it and I hoarded it and I saved it and I wouldn't spend it on anything for years. And I noticed, , I'm making money, I'm getting the success, but I still don't feel good with money. Even a year and a half ago, as I was finishing this book and doing my own research, I had some big wounds. I had some big wounds that came up where there was a company that owed me about a million dollars and the old wounded part of me as a child that had money stolen from me at one point came up and I saw this reaction and this scarcity and this stress and this anxiety that kind of put me in a lower energetic state for a few months. And I was , how perfect is this that I haven't finished this book yet, writing it, but this is showing up for me. A big wound. And it was a beautiful blessing because I was , it's teaching me a lesson on what I still need to improve on and how I can still grow around my own money story and create more peace. And I think the whole goal of this book and this conversation for your audience would be to show people how to create peace, harmony and abundance around money in their life, how to define what a rich life looks for them. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Exactly. Erasmus Prager. . I didn't write the book. I came up with it a long time ago. huh. I wrote hazard leg. . . I came to America inosing, not a long time ago, which is pretty awkward. . And we look uber viral to many people, ? . Americaция. It's one of those countries where I was paid if we're Bible. . we think it's the same thing. It's similar to what we did in a wider future. But that simple allowances, that multiplication, that Ribeir. you have to think through a lot. . How is that relationship for you? I'll give an example. And I'm going to ask you to share this in a second. I asked, I asked a family member of mine, a relative of mine. If money walked into a, , a restaurant, and you were in the restaurant and money walked in through the door, what would you do if it was a person if money was represented into a person? And this, this person was in their late 20s in their late 20s. And they said, I would run to the bar and avoid this person. If it was money, I would talk bad about it behind its back. I would. But then I would fake and act I liked it when it came up to me. Then I would use and abuse it when I needed it. And I would ghost it if it ever reached out to me. And I go, man, that seems a really unhealthy relationship with money. And they were , , I know. And their environment, their experience. This around money has also replicated that, that connection, that feeling that relationship. And it's, it doesn't mean something's good or bad, or wrong. But it's asking ourselves, do we have a healthy relationship with money? Is it causing more pain in our relationships, intimately in our environment? And if it is causing pain, how do we create a different relationship? Sean, if money walked in the door as a person, how would you respond? The first thing that I would feel. When you just pitched that and I could see it, I would feel grateful to see money. And I would speak to money and I would make sure that money wasn't there to somebody else needed them more. I didn't want to be greedy with their time and attention. But also I'm open and welcome. And I know that money knows me . And , , it would just be a vibe. It'd be a good vibe. , exactly. And that's good. you probably have a good relationship with money because that's how the experience is. it probably means when, when someone's in a relationship, they're , Oh, I'm going to be a good person. And when someone gives you a check or you receive money, you have a good feeling. It probably also means when you're spending money to invest in something or you're going on a trip, you're not stressed and anxious about it. , Oh, I'm spending this money. I have to really penny pinch everything. , maybe you're not extravagant spending everywhere constantly, but you have a good relationship and a good balance with it, which is healthy and a secure relationship. And most people don't have a secure relationship with it. And I think that's, that's really what I'm trying to do is give people the tools and the knowledge. I'm trying to understand their money story to see how their personality style matches with their wounds or their traumas around money. And just see, is that serving you in your life? Do you have a rich life because of the story and the style that you've developed over time? If not, how do we start rewiring you emotionally in your nervous system to feel safe with money when it comes to you, when it leaves you? , there's a mantra I have that it's the more I relax, the more I can receive when I'm tight, when I'm clinched, when I'm anxious, when I'm stressed out, it's hard to receive love, affection, money opportunities. It's hard to see the opportunities we're in that fight and flight mode, ? But the more I relax, the more I can see and I can receive and I can be generous and I can, and all these things can happen. And I just see many people struggling with money and I'm, I'm in no way some money guru. I don't know the best place to invest your money. I don't know where you should be doing these things. I have my strategies that make me feel good. This is more about understanding your story and your belief system around it and how to heal that. you have a beautiful relationship and a rich and abundant life. . And this is something you talk about in the book, but you're one of my money mentors, , it's because I can relate to you. , you come from similar circumstances, similar part of the globe and also coming from such a dire circumstance as . And you even unpacked it even more. And , it's something. It's , I had to take a moment reading your book and also just coming back from your wedding, of course, I'm just feeling a lot of emotions around you. And , , you getting injured, , working, living your dream really as an athlete. And of course, , you were working towards something and that injury that took you off the field. And , at that point you're still able to depend on your dad. Yup. And your dad was in a devastating car accident not too long after that. And being faced with this new. Magnified problem. I guess I don't have my dad to depend on either. what am I going to do? And everything was just being taken away from you and also taken away from your dad. And just that story really hit my heart as . But just the things that you went through and for you to progressively overcome things, but then you can develop some different, , you talk about the shadow side of these styles and we're going to talk about all this stuff, but you were able to achieve many different levels of success, but ultimately define fulfillment. And this is, this is something I didn't mention about this. Let me share this with you. in that study from plus one, determining that financial stress and depression are linked. They also found a positive, of course, a positive association between financial stress and depression in high income and low, low to middle income areas. But it was even stronger among people with low income or with wealth. . . Both extremes. Both extremes. , , the wealth is a more of a, of the, of the spectrum. wealthy tends to be more depression linked to it. Isn't that interesting? Isn't it because that, as you mentioned that fulfillment isn't necessarily there and you can start to make strange decisions. I mean, I got an interesting story around that. I mean, it's , imagine having everything and feeling you have nothing and in everyone else's world, they say to you, you have all the money in the world. You have all the success. You're healthy. How do you not see how good your life is? imagine hearing this from other people. And knowing that you have everything, but inside of you, you feel worthless. You feel undeserving. You feel unloved and you feel you have nothing. That is a prison in my mind. It sucks to be poor and know you have nothing, but to have everything and not appreciate it, man, that's really challenging. And there's that's part of the study of the extreme. And a few years ago I was living in an apartment building here in Los Angeles and I went on a road trip. I came back and there was a tent in the valet. And I was, I was pulling up. I was , I'm going to go to the valet. I'm gonna go to the valet. I'm going to go to the valet. And I pulled up, there was a white tent. I kind of made a joke to the valet attendant. I go, someone didn't jump today. And he was , , they did. And I was , this is a way. This is a joke. We're in one of the nicest buildings in Los Angeles, apartment buildings. And are you serious? Are you sure you're not joking? And he was , , it just happened 30 minutes ago. It was this shocking thing. When I found out who it was, the person was worth hundreds of millions of dollars and jumped. Now, this was the day after Father's Day. And I don't plan to assume I know this person's life story, but in the news, it talked about he was estranged from his son, , and you could just start to go down and make an assumption of the story. You can put the pieces together and you start hearing from other people that knew him. You start hearing stories from people that worked in the building. It was , oh, here's a guy who seemingly had everything in terms of financial wealth, but didn't live a rich life inside. . And maybe that's part of the statistic of this extreme wealth linking to depression. If you're unable to appreciate and love and accept yourself and have rich relationships, it might be even more painful having that wealth. . You mentioned that money is a magnifier of who you are. many of us, we think that money is going to change us and our circumstances. And, , and what you really pointed out is that with building wealth, you're going to be able to do a lot of things. You're going to be able to do a lot of things. You're going to be able to do a lot of things. You're going to be able to do a lot of things. And we're in a relationship, not just with our food. We're in a relationship with our food. We're in a relationship with our food. I think that's what you're talking about with this. , when you're building wealth and making money easy, we want to not just, you're giving people those insights on how do we get to that place financially, but also to have the fulfillment in a rich life as . Yes. And a big part of this, and you've already mentioned this several times, you said the key word is a relationship. And we're in relationship with everything. Everything is a relationship. We're in a relationship with our food. We're in a relationship, obviously, we tend to think about it just in terms of people, with our, with our spiritual connection. If we're reading a book, we're in a relationship with that thing. And starting to personalize it, I love that example of if money walked into the room and you hear the different spectrum of answers that I gave versus someone else. , you'd be grateful, you'd be generous. Hey, how are you? What do you need today? . There's a. I interviewed a guy who wrote a book called Happy Money, which is. His name's Ken Honda out of Japan. And. I met him at Agape. You did? . That's a long time ago. He's such a sweet guy. He does all these kind of social experience with himself or he has over the years. And one of them was, he didn't have a good relationship with money at one point. And he said, every time I see money, I'm gonna thank money. I'm just gonna do this little simple practice inside that if I find a penny on the street, I'm gonna say, thank you. If someone gives me a million dollars, I'm gonna say, thank you. I'm just gonna say, thank you. Whenever I get any type of payment that comes into my bank account, thank you. Thank you. Gratitude, gratitude. And then he follows it up with saying, thank you money. Where do you wanna go? Do you wanna go in my bank account? Do you wanna go to an investment? Do you wanna buy a home with you? Do you wanna give you away? Do you wanna pay for someone's coffee? Where do you wanna go? And he has this direct relationship and he's very intentional every time money comes, where it's gonna go. He gives it a direction. He has this relationship with it and he's. It's almost he's talking to money as if it was a person, as if it was a living being. It was this energetic being. And. And he's not worshiping money. He just has a relationship with it that makes him feel emotionally safe and abundant. And food is energy and is money. Money is energy, food is energy. And when you eat things with a lower frequency within the food, it's gonna affect your energy physically. And you're gonna have a relationship with that constant eating. You're probably gonna gain weight. You might have inflammation. You're gonna get sick maybe at times. Your immune system's gonna be suppressed. And on the opposite side, when you start eating healthier foods, you have a different relationship with that energy and you're nourishing yourself with that energy. And I think we need to be thinking about money in that same nourishment attitude, that same reflection, that same relationship. And you talk about the food side of things much. It's having a relationship with your food. I love the cookbook that you have where it's sitting down with your family, talking, thanking food. ? They pray over their food and there is this intention saying, thank you food for being here. Thank you for people that made this food. Thank you to whoever made it here preparing this food. It's creating a ritual. It's not worshiping food, but it's creating a beautiful relationship with it. And I think again, our beliefs around food impact and influence our behaviors on what we're gonna eat. And that impacts everything. And the same thing with our beliefs and behaviors around money. You could have just changed everybody's life just now. Getting that part, the same thing with our food and having gratitude and thanksgiving and blessing the food, blessing the people involved in it and having that relationship with money as and not making it, it's not that you're worshiping money because of course that's that tenant that can make people repel money is the root of all evil. It's the love of it, ? Making that your God. And we know some people make that mistake as , but we're not talking about that. We're talking about having a healthy relationship because here's a concept. Eat that food. Probably gonna need some money. what I mean? , exactly. it's all in relationship. And a big part of this relationship that we have in my perspective when money walked in the room, it's different from what it was 10 years ago, 20 years ago, 15, 25 years ago. What was it when you were broke in Ferguson, Missouri, struggling and your back was broken and you couldn't walk and you're not making money? What was your relationship with money then? Man, if I could tune into that. And you're eating fast food all day and you're sick. And you're victim mindset. To be honest, I probably wouldn't even recognize money. Money came in with a trench coat. And what I mean? Money would be a Superman type. Look is that kind of. Clark King's got glasses on, kind of look . I wouldn't have even been able to recognize. Really? For sure. For sure. What if you would have known, , money. Someone announces money is walking in the door now. And it says, here it is. What would you have done in that moment? What would your immediate relationship have been ? I would have just stayed in my lane. I would just stayed in my lane. If money. I mean, this is the thing. And now that I'm talking about this, and I love. This is why I love talking with you too. I would feel that money would notice me. I would feel that money would notice me. It would see you. . Would notice me. And not necessarily, again, come and talk and all that stuff, but I would see. and maybe this is a prediction of my future, but I wouldn't have been feeling I deserved per se to be noticed, but I just would have felt . There's something about me that money would notice. that would be the extent of it. It would have noticed you. Maybe it would have spoken to you or not, but it would just said, oh, I see this person over there is struggling or. Not necessarily struggling, but just , I see you, listen. . that. And how would you have responded if money came up to you and said, hey, I see you. I see your potential. Whoa. I would probably. I'm conflicted now. I'd probably be , part of it is , it's about time. The other part would be , are you sure? I don't think I'm ready for this. I don't think that I'm worthy of this. this leads me to my point, which is our relationship with money is. It's dependent upon our story and our story about ourselves, about our relationship with life, who we see ourselves as. And let's talk a little bit more about our story in regards to our money blueprint. . I mean, I'll share you a couple of moments in my story. When I was younger, and I think people could relate to some of this, and I would love for you to leave a comment if you're watching on YouTube, leave a comment of some of your money story memories below or somewhere on social media. I don't know if you're on social media, Shawn can see this. But I have. My money story was tied to stress and chaos. Because my parents. I don't to use the word always, but frequently they were stressed out, screaming at each other, slamming doors. And that just seemed to tie into a sense of lack. We were middle class. But I remember playing kind of roller hockey. And the. . . . . . We were in the neighborhood parking lot. And I was the only one who had sneakers, not roller blades, because we couldn't afford it. it was , , I was playing with them, but I couldn't afford it. , Nintendo was big. I couldn't afford Nintendo. it's I wasn't able to get those things. we had a home, we had food, all these things, but there was always stress around it, which just caused part of my story. There was a time where I. My brother went to prison, and there was a lot of money stress around that, paying for lawyers and just kind of going in debt, my parents. ? it was this trauma tied to we didn't have the money to pay for things plus my brother's in prison for selling drugs to an undercover cop. And there was just kind of trauma tied to money and pain. During that time, I wasn't really allowed to have friends in the neighborhood growing up in a small town in Ohio, because everyone knew that my older brother was in jail. they didn't want to hang out their kids with me. And I remember there was a moment where these two kids started a club. I don't know if you're ever in a club as a kid, these two kids started the club, an after class club or whatever, in the basement of their house. And I was , I really want to be in this club was that I didn't have friends. They said, , you need to answer a list of questions to get in to see if you're smart enough. Or if not, you have to pay to be in the club. And I was , I don't have any money. what are the questions? They asked me the questions. I didn't know the answers. They're , you can't be in the club unless you pay us a 5 entry fee. I went home and I asked my mom, I said, Mom, I really want to get in this club and be friends with these kids. Can I have 5? And I could see the disappointment in her mind, not because she didn't want me to be friends with them, or be a part of this club, but she didn't have the money. She goes, let me see what I can find. She's literally asking me to flip over the cushions and the couches and just, , they'd spent all their money on legal fees. And it wasn't they had a lot. Somehow she finds in an hour's time change and puts in a shoebox for me, 5 and change. I go to this house where these kids are, I give them the shoebox and they let me in their club. But for the next hour, they're just hanging out with themselves. And I'm kind of alone in the corner in the basement. , what am I doing? It was the most depressing, even just thinking about it. It's a wound. It's a story. It's a memory that shaped my personality style. It shaped me in a certain way. And there's other stories that. I remember I never, I went home after where it was after that night. And I never went back to that club because I didn't feel good. I didn't feel worried. I didn't feel I was going to be able to do anything. I didn't feel worthy still, even though I paid. . And there's certain stories that. I had money stolen from me. I used to steal money a lot from people. And it's , it shaped me these wounds that I had to learn how to break. And I had to learn how to heal. And it just took time. And I think whoever's watching or listening, write in a story that you have that shaped your, your history and type in a money wound or two. , can you remember something? You don't have to share all the details, but something that happened that you still think about today that might have shaped part of your personality style with money. And you said this, you weren't ready for money. One of my money mentors early on when I was broken my sister's couch, I was working for free for someone as an intern. And my payment was I could ask him questions at any moment. every day we'd go for lunch and I just ask him questions and he would teach me. And one day I was , man, I'm broke. I could really, really, really, really, really, really, really use some money. And he said, money comes to you when you're ready for it. And I was just , I feel pretty ready for money now. I can use it. I'm on my sister's couch. I don't have any money. I feel helpless. , I was 23, 24 at the time. And I was just , I don't feel I'm living up to my potential. I don't, I can't do anything with my life. I don't have a car. I just felt a bum. It was , money will come to you when you're ready for it. And as painful as it was to hear at that time, about a year and a half, two years later, I started to make some money. And I remember reflecting back to that moment. And I was , if someone had handed me 5,000, I would have blown it because I wasn't ready for it. I needed to learn certain skills on how to navigate money better. And that's why you see a lot of people that the statistics with people that win a lot of money in the lottery, they go broke within a couple of years, they commit suicide, they go through depression, all these different things because they weren't ready for it. Some people maybe were and they got lucky. You see this, with elite athletes who go bankrupt within a couple years after retiring from sports. Maybe they're ready for the spotlight, but they're not ready to manage the money, the wealth that comes to them at 19 years old. They don't have the energy, the emotion connected to it, and I really navigate it. And all the different relationships that people want from you now. Now that you have success, you have money, and everyone's asking for something from you. It doesn't feel good. It doesn't feel good if money walked in and you just said, give me money. It doesn't that relationship. What are you going to provide for the money? How are you going to serve money as ? Where's the common thread in the relationship? And I really had to learn that money comes to you more when you're ready for it. And even when you're ready to make it, it doesn't mean you're going to have a healthy relationship with it. I still was hoarding my money for the first eight years, because I was afraid to go back to my sister's couch. I was afraid to go broke again. I wasn't really able to enjoy it. Sure, I felt I had safety and a safety net. If something happened and I couldn't make money, I had it saved. But I wasn't living a rich life internally, because I was still living in fear around it. And I think again, one of the biggest problems people have is when you make money and you start to make it, and you start to use your talents, your skills, and add value to something, and you start earning money, and you can't appreciate it. You can't appreciate it. You can't be in peace still. For me, that's a big problem. , . And now to think of it, I am. Thank you for sharing that story, man. It pulls on my heartstrings. But to think of the healing that you've gone through, the process, and the growth, and what just happened. And I'm going to bring this to the spotlight. Bring it up. you had a moment of essentially paying to have friends, ? And not even having the resources really to even make that happen. You just got married, surrounded by your friends just a couple of weeks ago. And- . The thing was all of us felt privileged to come and to be a part of that. And we paid. , exactly. Because it was in Mexico. , exactly. I paid a lot too. But , . Of course. No doubt. No doubt about it. But it's just a full circle moment to where you don't have to try to advocate or to buy the affection of others. It's all of these people just love you because you're you. And we're willing to, because of the person you are, do what we can on our part to be a part of your story. . And it's appreciated. And it's interesting because as we were trying to plan this wedding, part of us were , oh, should we do it in LA? Should we do it in Mexico? Where should we do this? Should we have a big wedding, a small wedding? Should we just do us two? We're just talking about all these different things. And I was , I don't know why I don't want to do it in LA, because I don't want to feel I'm obligated to invite everyone. Invite everyone who's in LA. I was , I'd rather just invite a select few people. And it doesn't mean I'm not for you. I'm not for you. And it doesn't mean I'm not friends with more people that I would want to invite. But I was , let's only have a certain amount and only we can only invite a certain amount of people. Then if we only want to have this many people, we only wanted a hundred. I think there was 120 and most of them was her family. It's an extended family. But I was , we're going to see a lot of who our friends are. If we go somewhere else to see who wants to actually pay to go. Because anyone could show up in LA and just drive down the street. But , let's, let's do it in LA. just drive down the street. But , let's just see if people want to go. And if no one comes that's too. we don't have to spend as much on the wedding, , it was , we'll see. And it was beautiful. I think 98 of people RSVP that we invited and the people that didn't, they just had a child or something recently or something else happened. But, , it's beautiful to see when you create those scenarios. And also it's beautiful to know that I didn't need people to show up in that, in a sense, I would have been, I would have loved myself and loved our marriage if it was just five of us in the family. , it's , I didn't need all these people. I didn't need it. And it was almost , oh man, we kind of wish less people showed up, , in a sense. I'm glad everyone did, but it wasn't a, it wasn't a need. And that's a big full circle moment for me. It was , I needed friends when I was eight years old. All I need is , is to love myself and feel peace about myself and have a great relationship with Martha. . I mean, I think that's, I think that's a really good point. I think that's a really good point. I think that's a really good point. And I think that's a really good point. And I think that's a really good point. And my team in my community here, but I don't need lots of friends anymore. And I don't need lots of money. I want money to be able to use it for my mission, to be able to serve my mission, to have an expansive, rich, abundant life. But it's not I need and I crave it. And it's just shifting the relationship a little bit. And it's a constant work in progress. It's not I've mastered this. It's still learning, growing, developing, healing, it's a constant journey. . . I didn't share this with you, but I don't make a habit of going to weddings. I don't them either, man. It's a lot. It's because, it's because, and I'm just going to share this with everybody. It's because of the investment in the relationship. I'm voting for you. I'm investing in this and I don't know the parts, ? Being able to spend time with you and with your wife over the years, even that magical moment of moments of, of being with your wife, even that magical moment of moments of how you guys met and connected. And we spent hours talking. Do you remember that in the hotel? In Atlanta, ? In Atlanta. That was funny. And , I had hit you up just , hey, we're here, invited you to come out. And then we just sat there, the restaurant was closed and just here. I was literally, my jaw was on the floor and all these synchronicities of how you guys connected, and just to see that unfold over time and to see the commitment and the growth and all the things, just , yes, I'm vote. I'm, I am casting my vote for this. , that's cool. And also the sync, the synchronicities I knew were going to be plentiful, which was- At the wedding? , of course. Of course. , that's great. I share this with you that even when we got there, the people that came up to , literally certain, a couple rushed up to us and just started talking to us, didn't really know us that, , not from the, , internet sphere, but just somehow they were magnetized to us. huh. Of course they ended up being seated at the table with us, , on the wedding day. you, you guys already knew who to seat together. Of course. we ended up spending time with the people that we ended up being seated. you guys already knew. We were very intentional about everything. that's- Everything was very intentional. Everything was very intentional in terms of seating people in the place. And we went over many times, , who do we want to get to know each other and who's going to resonate with each other? And I think, when you're intentional with your money, that relationship with money can grow. Just when you're intentional with your relationships, , you do a really great job with this. I think this is one of my superpowers as , is connecting people to help them accelerate their growth together. Yes. I was asking you before, , who are some of the top episodes you had? And you were this, , dentist guy. I was , oh, I just went through this traumatic experience with my teeth for the last six years. I'd love to interview them. And that's probably gonna help a lot of people. And when you can, when you can invest in your relationships and, and seeing how you can serve people and add value, that relationship grows. . When you can invest in your relationship with money and how you can be of service to your money to see it grow, it will continue to flourish, thrive, and create abundance for you. And you don't know where the relation, you adding value in people's relationships in life will stem from. I don't know what's gonna happen with those synchronicities you had at my wedding. The people you met that you knew that you didn't know, maybe something happens, maybe something that never happens. But you're gonna have a memory and that memory is valuable. It creates a moment inside of you that's abundant. That's a beautiful experience. It's, man, this thing happened. I met this person. It's just gonna live inside of you. And when you can plant those seeds in people, you're investing in relationships and the same is true with your money. . Oh man. All . what I wanna do is to dig in a little bit more on something that you, I took the quiz as in the book and I was shocked. What was your style? My style was the director. All . I took the quiz and I'm just , I don't know about these questions. I don't know. But then once I read the detail on what the director is, it's , oh, you just read me. And I can also see, and I went through it and I thought about my wife and also her perspective, the choices that she would make. And I could see how she's more one type. And you also talk about , what if you're two? , . And , . We might have a mix of all of them. It's just kind of what's your dominant type. I think all of us do, but , what is the dominant style? What is she, the shepherd or the analyzer? What was she? She's more of the shepherd. . But analyzer was the other one that was very close. How did you freaking know, man? Exactly. I know her personality. Talk about these money styles. What is a money style? A money style is really just kind of your unique personality style towards money. There's an amazing book called Attached. I don't know if you've seen this book. It's about a relationship book. And supposedly there's kind of three styles. There's three kind of personality styles that we have in a relationship. Three kind of personality styles. And some of us are anxious, some of us are avoidant, and some of us are secure in relationships. you and your wife seem very secure. Sometimes people get together and one person is anxious and one person is avoidant. there's a clingy person and the person that just wants to run away. Or there's two people that are clingy, or there's two people that are avoiding each other, ? And I was , that's kind of interesting because usually when you have that similar personality style in a intimate relationship, you're going to have a lot of it might mirror and match your personality style towards your money relationship. Because money is very intimate for a lot of people. I just wanted to go through that to see , , if we could create a personality style and understand it by going through a quiz to see this assessment to see what is my personality style towards money, then it just gives us more power, more knowledge. And there's some benefits. And there's kind of these shadow styles as towards your personality style. Someone who's , I guess, anxious in an intimate relationship, there might be some benefits of that. they're always looking out for the person, they're always checking in on them, they're concerned about them. But the shadow style might be they're clingy that they're never trusting them. And it's trying to understand that towards your money. And some people spend, spend, spend because they're wounded and they get a benefit. They get a dopamine hit when they buy something every day. They're shopping on the internet. They're shopping on the internet. They're buying something every day. They're shopping on the internet. They're buying something every day. They're shopping online. They're not secure with their money. Or some people don't spend at all and they're stingy or they just hoard it. I was that way for a long time because I was living in scarcity. I was able to make money, but I still lived in scarcity because I was , what if I lose it all? it created anxiety inside of my nervous system. And I just want people to have awareness on their story, their history around money, awareness around what personality style towards money is more their dominant go-to. It doesn't mean it's this all you are, it's four different styles. And when you put those two together and you multiply it, you understand how your money strategy is. And when you can start to see how you can shift these things, you can heal the past, you can shift your money style better and lead into the strengths of your style, then you can just start to make better decisions with your money. And that's what I want people to do. Feel emotionally, at peace and free with their money. they live an abundant life. It's powerful, man. what, what you're doing with this, with this relationship with money is you're bringing it into our face, ? Because this is happening, whether we it or not, understand it or not, we're having a relationship with money, but often, and this, our culture, we are programmed in a way that, , we pick up these stories, ? Your story is similar. It's the majority of us have dysfunctional stories around money. And we believe subconsciously is , if we check all the boxes, then we can make money, ? I go to school, go to college, get a good job, and then I'm gonna be financially successful. And most people that follow that track are not just not successful monetarily, they're in debt. Are successful. Society is set up in a way that is encouraging people being in debt. Yes. And creating all this anxiety, creating dysfunctional relationships, furthering them, , and one of the cool things about the book is that, and my favorite section is taking you to money therapy. Yes. All . I thought we would go through some of those steps of going to money therapy. . . All , step number one in taking yourself to money therapy is identifying your money triggers. . One for me, and again, it may not ever leave you, ? It's healing is a journey. And your triggers might be a journey as . And the goal is to just notice them and ask yourself, , do I feel safe? If not, let me create safety within my nervous system. When I feel safe within my nervous system, then I can respond differently to these triggers. for me, when I felt someone was taking advantage of me, it felt abuse because I was sexually abused as a kid, talked about that on the show. And that could show up in any little thing. If someone's cutting me off in a car, it's , I could feel I'm being abused. there's little triggers where if I feel someone's trying to overcharge for something, I'm , huh, they're trying to take advantage of me. It's unfair. . And I could feel this trigger. Connected to that wound. Exactly. And , , I'm not really as reactive now as I used to be, but those could still be triggers that could show up if I'm not doing the practices. If I'm not continuing to be on the healing journey with money therapy. And that's just something for me. . . that's something, again, as we're going through. And by the way, of course, get the book yesterday. But being able to identify what your triggers are, your money triggers. When some big announcement comes out about me and people see it, and then I see people reach out to me, and I know they haven't reached out to me for years. And they reach out to me, and it's almost there's this feeling that they're about to ask for something. . And then within a few weeks, they say, hey, can you help me with this? Or can you help me with this? It may be innocent, but I also feel , huh, they haven't been investing in the relationship for years. And all of a sudden, they want something from me, because they see me doing something . That can be a trigger where I feel taken advantage of. And I'm , oh, they want me for my success or my money, or they're going to ask for money. it's just learning to be and feel safe within myself around these things. And also, I don't have to give everything to everyone. I can create boundaries, healthy boundaries, but just not feel as triggered about it. Do you have any money triggers? one thing that pops up for me is something that I've healed from, but it was relative. It was a couple of years ago still. It still bothers me. And that was being seen or taken advantage of by people close to me when it comes to money and having a relationship built on that. . ? . ? And I was in a condition where there's a lot of, obviously, we were in poverty. We were getting money, food stamps. And there are times you get food from charities and things that. And there were a lot of stories around money, these sayings that my mom would say I still hear to this day. What are those sayings? I'm broke as a joke. Oh, man. There's one which is wildly inappropriate. She'd say, I'm broke as a broke dog. Wow. Please bleep that. Why? Why, mom? Why, mom? But she would just say these wild things when it comes to money. , , do I look I'm made of money? , this kind of stuff. Has your mom ever been financially free? No. On her own? , she's been on her own. And that was a journey. How many has she been financially free now? Or she's ? She's doing stuff. She's created her own life. But I do a lot for her. She hasn't created her own wealth, necessarily. . And this brings me to the trigger, which is there was a time when, , I was in a relationship with a guy. And I was , I'm going to be a lawyer. I'm going to be a lawyer. I'm going to be a lawyer. And there was a time when my mother, when I was , stuff was very sketchy for me. And I was basically getting a refund check from my college scholarship and grants. And I'd get maybe 2,000 back. And I would use that to pay my rent. My mom asked to borrow some money. And I was , mom, listen, I got to pay. make sure. Please give it. She was , I just take care of it. She said she'd pay you back. She ghosted me. Oh, man. I've had that. That's what happened to me many times. My mom, my old mom. Oh, that's a wound. ? That's a money trauma. And again, now here's the thing. Me then was hurt that my mom would allow me to get kicked out on the street. And I remember calling her. I called her from a different number. It's how she picked up. Because , you got to call her ID. And I'm , where are you? And she, , she made up a story, which is something typical. Of course. And at the time I felt brokenhearted. Now because of, again, healing and taking responsibility. Obviously she was just trying to survive. She was trying to do what she felt she needed to do. It's not that she hated me. Doesn't make it though. It doesn't make it at all. It obviously, she doesn't want to hurt her son, but it's just the situation that she was in. . And I stopped. The trigger would be her asking me for things. And over time still, I would loan her, give her, ? Because I didn't have my stuff together. But then once I got to a place of more certainty and stability for myself, I was just , just take it. Whatever you need. Don't give it. . I don't want it back. Because she would even say that still. It took , it took a long time for her to stop saying, I'll give it back. I'm just , mom, please no. This is just, I'm your son. I love you. I want you to be . That's good. ? And I freed myself of that trigger of being asked for something and then being chemically and emotionally dependent on them coming through for me. Not being let down or disappointed. . It sounds you've gotten to a place where you've created a money agreement with yourself that you say, I'm going to give a certain amount to my mom. At certain times that I feel good about. And she doesn't have to pay me back. It's what it sounds . You create a new agreement by going to money therapy. And when we don't have these agreements in place, when someone breaks our agreement, when they lie to us, they say, I need money. I'll pay you back. And they don't. They've broken your heart because they've broken an agreement. And it's sad. And that's been a trigger of mine for many times, many times, loaning out money, giving money to people and then not paying it back when they said they would do it. And feeling really , how could you not do this? And being emotionally hurt by it, that creates a money trauma, a money wounds that we need to learn how to heal. And you can do that by taking your power back and also creating new agreement with yourself, having the boundaries around money. . If my mom asked for money, , do I feel good giving it to her knowing that she's not going to pay it back? If you don't feel good, maybe you don't give it now. Or maybe you give less, or maybe you ask yourself where you're at in your life. . If you would give some, cool, you give some. It all has to depend on where you're coming from. . , , a big part of that was an act. And I'm just now talking with you, it comes up for me. That ended a couple years ago when I decided to do something for her proactively without any expectation. And this was a change in our relationship. When I was a kid, I told her that when I grow up, I'm going to get you a Cadillac. ? And it's just something that I wanted to do for my mom. It was always there in my mental Rolodex, , my memory bank. And I did that. A couple years ago you did? . Wow. How did that feel? It felt amazing. , it felt I fulfilled a promise. Wow. And when I did that, it was , it was, there was no expectation. There was no expectation. I'm doing this for my mom because I said I want, and I wanted to, and it brought a sense of completion for me as . And the relationship was different after that. There was no more expecting her to do certain things or be a certain way just because she's my mom. It's just. She was still acting the same way. She was still asked for money every few months. She was still being herself. . But your relationship shifted inside of you. As a matter of fact, she asked for me to help her fix her car. The one that you bought her? No, no. A different one? A different car. And instead of that, I got her a new one. Oh, that's pretty baller. . Wow. . I mean, listen, it wasn't a brand new off the floor with all the, what I'm saying, the screens and the automatic start. what I'm saying? It was, it was. It wasn't a junker though. No. . But your relationship shifted within you with her. . . And she kept being the same. She didn't change, but you shifted. . And it helped heal you. Yes. That's powerful. . That's really powerful. let's move to number two here. number one, identify your money triggers. Number two is to write it down. . I just think it's powerful to identify within your mind and think about these stories, but then write down a kind of a list of these triggers, these wounds, these things. you can have them in the forefront and start to address them one by one, start to process them. Start to see what acts can I take that will support me in overcoming these things that cause me anxiety in my nervous system when I think about it, or cause me these triggers. Just having the awareness, writing it down is a powerful act. . . I love that. I love that. It's bringing it, it's just again, getting it out of your head. Getting it out, man. And, and speaking it, whether it's speaking it out, which goes to this next one, talk to a safe person. . Don't talk to someone who's caused the trigger or the trauma necessarily away. Talk to someone that you trust. A mentor, a friend, a therapist, a coach, a priest, whatever it might be that you feel safe with to address these things. It's going to give you much more peace just speaking about it with someone that's trustworthy who can listen. Not someone who caused the trauma that you want to scold them. , maybe there's another time for that where you can come to peace with them if that's possible, but getting it out, thinking about it, writing it down, speaking it out. . And again, this is a process. This is taking yourself to money therapy. Yes. And if you're going to be able to get that money triggers, write it down, talk to a safe person. The next one, number four is to forgive yourself and others. Man, I don't know about you, but I held onto much resentment towards myself about stealing as a kid for about a year and a half. I stole every time I went into a store from 10 and a half to 11 and a half, 12. It was every time it was a game and it was trying to get attention because I didn't feel I was, I had no friends. I had no validation. I had wounds and it was trying to be seen. , I didn't think anyone was seeing me and it gave me a sense of power by being able to steal. And it was candy bars or , it wasn't a ton, but it was still, I was living out of integrity every single day. I went to a store to try to feel powerful because I felt powerless. And in return, I heard a lot of people, , I heard these store owners, I might have heard an employees who were counting. I heard they were counting inventory and they had missing inventory, whatever it might have been, I caused pain on other people. And for years I would beat myself up and I was , God, I was such an idiot. How could I do this? I was stupid. What was I thinking? And sure, I should have a consequence to that, but holding onto that pain and resentment of myself for decades did not serve me. And again, there's a, there's a, there's a, it's a good part of the consequence of , knowing this part of me when I had money, I just wanted to pay for everyone all the time. I was , I just want to pay it forward. I'm going to buy everyone's meal. I'm going to pay for everything, whatever it might be. Cause I felt guilty. ? there was maybe some good side to it also, but then I just felt shameful as . And that shame doesn't create anything abundant. That energy of shame is very low frequency energy. It doesn't create abundance. And that I've lived in scarcity. And it wasn't until I started to forgive myself. I started to forgive myself. I started to forgive myself for all the things I did when I was 10, 11, 12, whatever, stealing and hurting people in that way. Then I was able to be more at peace. And again, my intention is to give people the tools to feel financially free. It doesn't mean you're going to have millions of dollars in the bank, but you'll hopefully be peaceful and harmonious around the money you have or don't have because you've cultivated that within you. And that takes healing, forgiveness, letting go of self-criticism. But what you used to do now that we have awareness, we can make different decisions. And when we feel abundant versus scarce, we can live the most powerful habit within the seven habits in the book, which is the mindset habit, which is to be generous and grateful and continue all the time. you said, if money walked in the door, you'd be grateful. You say, thank you for being here. And most people say. I give when I have money, but we need to flip that on its head and say, this is the first habit that I need to have to create a rich and abundant life is to be grateful and give generously. Even if you don't have money, you can think about ways you can give of your time, of your energy, of your love, of your curiosity, of your presence, of your connection, of your connecting people together for them to flourish. You can think in other ways on how can I serve and give generously. And when I was 23, 24, 25, living on my sister's couch, broke as a joke what your mom would say, had no money, living in college debt, living off my sister's food and feeling worthless, feeling undeserving and unworthy. I had to shift out of that by saying, what can I give? I didn't know because I didn't have a college degree yet and I didn't think I had skills to contribute to anyone. But what I did have was power. I had the power. I had the power. I had the power. I had the power. I had the power. I had the power. I had the passion. I had hunger. I had a curiosity. I was able to be consistent with my goals and follow up and do whatever it took. And little did I know, Sean, that I would make a, , a multimillion dollar business off of asking questions and being curious. one of my skills was asking dumb questions to people and just being , how do you do this? And , how'd you do this? And what about this moment? I never thought that was an asset. But we all have these invisible assets within us that when we can cultivate and give them generously, we can live a rich and abundant life. . That's powerful. I love the framing on that. , what people would think, why are you asking dumb questions? I know, ? No, you literally built, not only that, did you, did you build this success for yourself, but you've impacted the lives of many millions of people, many. And it's just , you've paid it forward immensely in ways you don't even realize, , because of that audacity. , and it was kind of, this is the cool thing. It was built into you already. And that's where you're directing people to with Make Money Easy, which is directing them inward because we all have a personal relationship and to be more aware of it. And I want to take you to number five here on this list. After Forgive Yourself and Others, again, we're taking ourselves to money therapy. Yes. Number five is to practice overcoming your triggers. this is practice. That's it, man. When someone cuts you off. You talking about practice? What's that? Practice. We're talking about playoffs. When, , I used to get triggered a lot in LA when I first came out here because of being stuck in traffic. I just didn't it. And I literally felt people were trying to hurt me and abuse me when they would cut me off. And I remember this is, , I don't feel good saying this, but I remember there was a guy I pulled up. I don't know if I've told you this story. I was in West Hollywood. I was driving my Cadillac that from, that I bought from my money mentor that you met three weeks ago. My, my wedding, Stuart Jenkins, who you're sitting next to. I bought his Cadillac for 5,000 from him when I moved to Los Angeles 13 years ago. And it was a 5,000 Caddy used car was a 1997, , Cadillac Eldorado Berets. Beautiful, , old grandpa car, but it was amazing for me. And I was driving in West Hollywood. Look at these synchronicities that are coming here. I'm driving in West Hollywood in my, my Cadillac. And, , sometimes when you . Roll into a. Stop sign, you slowly go and you're looking left, but you're going to go to the , but you're seeing who's left first. I slowly, I stop and then I kind of roll slowly across the white line to turn, to look both ways. And as I turn back this way to the , there's a runner that's coming in and kind of stops. Cause I'm rolling in front of him, stops and he punches my car and runs around me and says something, some profanities. And I took that as abuse, ? He punched my car. He. Ran off and he said something nasty to me. I was triggered at this time. This is 13 years ago. I drove after him. He started going around the block. I'm driving after him. He turns around one way. I go in the middle of street, turn around to go after him. And at one point I stopped my car. I opened the door in the middle of the street and I start sprinting after him. That's how crazy the trigger was for me of the abuse. And I realized, oh, something is wrong. This was all before my healing journey. And I realized, oh, something. Is off. And now if some, if that happens again, , it wouldn't be that extreme, but if someone cuts me off and I don't it now, I act differently. I take a deep breath. , it's , what was the, what was the point that you said this point number six, seven, what is it? This one is practice over practice, overcoming your triggers, ? It's , we are going to be given our triggers on a daily basis and we get to prepare for them in the beginning of the day and then reflect on how we showed up. . I'm going to be able to show up at the end of the day. I love meditating first thing in the morning and saying, how, how do I want to show up today? What is my intention for today? When something goes wrong, how can I respond and rehearsing and practicing it and just noticing, I'm going to take a deep breath in my nervous system. I'm going to try to do my best to manage it, not be perfect. And at the end of the day, I to reflect, did I show up with the intention I had today? And I think that is a key in practicing, overcoming yourself. When you write all these things down, when you think about it, when you write down your. . Your money triggers and your stories, you start speaking about them. You can start to process them. When you process, you can start to practice it better when it comes up again, because these triggers and things will show up for you constantly in your life until you overcome them. And it is a goal and a vision and intention every morning to say, how do I want to show up today? When something happens, when my mom calls me and asks for money, how do I want to respond? Let me practice this. I'm not going to be perfect, but let me do better than last. Let me recite this every day. Let me praise myself, next moment. I'm going to help bring my relationship better. Jesus said, God saved me from suffering. He gave me this life. He gave me the power to win by the grace of Jesus. He saved me and I won't make it. I won't miss whatever it is, I don't want the killed, I want the cares no longer being in my life. I want to be free forever. I want to use that to opposed to suffering. I want to be nuggets. Now think of this inherited in your voice. I walk around and think of self. I want to evolve. I want to adapt. I want to advance. I want to increase level. I want to make a point on life and my success gets better and better in my own life. man, it's powerful. I love that example too. It was a whole movie. It was 20, in my head, it was 21 Jump Street. Oh man, I was. You're Channing Tatum type, jumping out the car. You're , I got speed brother. , the crazy thing is I caught myself because I could have gone and run this guy down. Of course. And I'm , somebody stops and go, what am I doing? And I'm , my car is back there a quarter mile. And I'm , am I really going to run this guy down? And then what? Beat him up. And then what? Go to jail? , what am I doing based on a trauma response? This does not serve me. And I had many of those moments where I was , something's wrong with me. And it means I've got to heal and reflect and overcome myself. . But this is the thing I love about you. One of the things I love about you is that, , many people, you share things many people can identify with, but they don't talk about them. . I mean, I'm willing to humiliate myself, man. But, , just even sharing, , what you went through with your life and your life and your life and your life and your life and your life and your with the abuse and, , and what you've gone through again with your parent, losing your father and sharing that story, it hit different. I knew about it, but I didn't know about the time in your life when it happened. And just , , it just, again, it helps us to feel more connected and that there is a way. number six here in taking yourself to money therapy is to create healthy boundaries. Man, I've had the, it sounds you did this with your mom and maybe you didn't create it with her, but you created it with yourself. . I've had different people close to me ask for money over and over again. And I felt taken advantage of. And it wasn't until I spoke up and said, this doesn't work for me anymore. This relationship doesn't work for me anymore. And I'd to create a new relationship with you around this. Here's why it doesn't work. I feel the only time you reach out to me is when you ask me for money. That doesn't feel good. I don't feel you care except for that. I can give you money. That's not a relationship I want. Here's the type of relationship I want. Is that something you're open to? And having these kind of challenging conversations where I used to just shy away from them and just avoid having them all in all. Now I'm learning how to have the courage to speak up and say, Hey, that doesn't work for me. Risk having someone being upset with me and being with it. It's very challenging when you've have anxiety in your chest. And I've had to learn that process over the years of having those conversations. And I've learned how to have that relationship. And I've learned how to have that relationship over the years of having those tough conversations. And those boundaries is what has given me peace and abundance. It's creating those boundaries, being willing to disappoint people at times, but doing it in a loving way. You can't determine how they're going to react. But if you show up for you, you're taking care of that inner child who has all those wounds that you've written down. And you're saying, I'm the adult in the relationship now, I've got you. No matter what anyone else does, I got you. And those boundaries create peace and freedom. And when you tie that to money, it creates financial freedom. . I don't think. We talked about this before the show, but a lot of times with achieving a goal or achieving that success that we want, it's about. It's not just about the things we do, it's about the things we stop doing. Because not having those boundaries, that essentially it's a barrier protection. If there are leaks in that, it's literally leaking your energy to be able to create what you want to create. Sucking the energy out of it. . And with that example with my mom, because of where my story and where I come from, my heart just wants to take care of my mom. I just want to take care of my mom. And what I would do is I take care of my mom that she run from me. And I feel I always have to try to run after her and she disappear. And . You're getting new burner phones just to call her. she picks up. ? . When I was a kid, man, and I don't know if I've shared this before, I know I've shared it with my family, but I would have this reoccurring dream. When I was a kid, I would have it for years, maybe. This was around when my brother was born and then I'd have it for years. I'm five years older than him. And she was holding him and she was off in the distance. And every time I get closer, she'd go through the door and then I'd go through the door that she was off in the distance again. And I couldn't get to her, and she was holding him. And I felt a little bit I wasn't as close to her, ? No. - . And I've carried that for years and just wanting to protect my mom, to be there. But my mom is the type of person, the environment we come from, where she just wants me to be tough. She doesn't want me to be too emotional, too soft. that's how she raised me. It wasn't to be close, but I yearned for that. Just suck it up, be tough. You carry that into adulthood to where I have these other, it's showing up in different ways where , , I do this thing for you, you want it from me. Are you gonna call me now? Are you gonna just check in on me? And that happened for years, ? And she goes me disappear. But it's also, again, it's loving her anyways, allowing her to have her story, how she lives her life, but creating that healthy boundary to where I'm no longer attached to this thing. Because it is my mom and my story, I'm deciding to, what, if you need something, I got you, but I'm not gonna have any expectation. And that was the boundary I set up. In other circumstances, literally , no, I'm just gonna have to decline. Not with my mom, but other, situations it's gonna depend on you, but please everybody listening for you to heal and to have a better relationship with your finances. And also this is with life stuff is to intentionally proactively set up some healthy boundaries. Stop allowing yourself to be hurt. That's the key. It's not righteous. It's not, nobody's gonna look back , what? We were able to abuse the shit out of this person. We've got to set up some boundaries that we can create the life that we want to create. It is your birthright. the last one here ties perfectly in taking yourself to money therapy is to motivate yourself to grow. That's number seven. I just think, , learners are earners. And when we continue to learn and develop skillsets, we have the ability to earn more again, financially, but earn more spiritually, emotionally, physically, and relationally in life. And continue to invest in learning and receiving feedback. And unfortunately for many years, I would, , make the same mistakes over and over again and just be in pain as opposed to saying, , this doesn't work anymore. Let me take the feedback and start learning new information and acting in a different way. And it's secular, , it's , you've got to heal the money story to create a new belief system for yourself that something is possible. And maybe you've never seen it possible for you yet. for years, I didn't know it was possible for me to make money. Once my dad got into his accident, all his money was gone. He was my backup plan to go work for him. I didn't have a college degree, living on my sister's couch. I didn't know, , it just didn't resonate with me. Why would anyone give me money? Why would anyone hire me, give me money? For what skill? I didn't have any skills. I had to shift, start shifting that belief that no one's going to give me any money because I'm not valuable enough to earn money in this business world. And that was a hard thing to shift because I just didn't understand. I didn't understand money. I started researching, reading books, learning about it, and just getting knowledgeable about it. I'd be , , I'm learning more. It's not as scary. Once I learned more, I found money mentors. I talk about that in the book as . And I found money mentors, and I started asking them questions about, how did they overcome it? And I could see before and after for them. , I see models, mentors with models that I can mimic. Great. Now I just need a money map. I need a money game plan. And it doesn't need to be, what's my 10-year financial plan? , what's the next three months? How do I get enough money to get off my sister's couch? Not become a millionaire. Screw all this Instagram life stuff. How do I make 1,000 a month? Let me just figure this one thing out. And from there, I learn, I act, and I get feedback. And I laugh my way to the bank. I learn, I act, and I get feedback. And that's the key. I love this much. There's much more that we can cover. We're getting short on time here. But I do want to really quickly touch on this, because step three in the book. step one in the book is know your money story. And we dug in on that. Step two is reset your money mindset. And that was part of going to therapy. Yes. But step three is where you prepare for more money. That's it. And these are really digging in on the mindset habit, the mapping habit, the monetizing habit. I just want to touch on really quickly just a couple of these. And when it comes to a mindset habit about money, what do you mean by that? Most people think that. When I have money, then I'll be generous. Then I'll give. But we need to be thinking, how can I give and be generous and be grateful first? Not, I'm going to go make money. And then when I have it, I'll give back to charity. I'll give to my friends. I'll give to my church. It's thinking, how can I be a contribution to the world now? Whether it be in a bigger scheme or just my world, how can I contribute and be generous? If you don't have money, how can I give time? If you don't have time, how can I give other resources, connections? Being generous with your information. And a lot of the wealthiest people that I've interviewed, the billionaires, the people who've exited billionaire companies, I ask a question about generosity and how it's tied to making more money. And probably 95 of the wealthiest people that I've interviewed, when I ask them, when you give uncomfortably a certain amount of money every year, do you usually make more money next year? And almost all of them say yes. And they all say that's part of the secret to generating more wealth. It's by giving more away, you're relaxing and allowing the flow of money to come back. Now you can't just say, I'm going to give all my money away and do nothing. You have to provide value. You have to have a system that can generate more money. But it's getting uncomfortable and not saying I'm going to hoard all my money to myself. I'm also going to contribute it. I'm going to relax. The more I relax, the more I can receive. The more I can give. The more it can come back to me. it's shifting this mindset of , I'll give when I make money to, I'm going to give what I can now with the money I have, the time I have, the resources I have. And be generous now, as opposed to being generous later. That's for me, the most powerful mindset habit. Amazing. Amazing. Again, we've got seven habits here. We're just going to touch on one more. I want to ask you about the monetizing habit. -. Monetizing habit is figuring out your money. . . . . . . . . Exactly. Butit , fighters Appliation. , the want to do is not going to go into quá. create, create. It's just, it's a big deal. . There you go. Cuz doing that I'm curious about, that I'm passionate about. I just started writing it down. And I was , how do you make money with this stuff? Little did I know all those hidden skill sets that I had is everything I'm doing now to make money. And it's just figuring out how to monetize those skills. first is identifying the skills that you have and also identifying the skills you lack and going to master those skills. I wasn't able to communicate. I didn't have public speaking skills. I didn't know how to do sales. I didn't know how to do any of these things. I didn't know how to write. I didn't know how to write books. I found mentors. I found a public speaking mentor. I found a writing mentor because I knew those would be tied to my goals of helping people in the world. And one guy was a professional speaker that I met. He said, if you want to influence people and impact people in a positive way, you need to learn how to communicate your message through public speaking. Whether you're in a boardroom and you work somewhere for 50 years, you're going to need to influence people in an office space, or you're speaking to the masses. He's , you need to go to Toastmasters and learn to overcome your fear. I had a list of my skills and a list of my fears. And I started going all into my fears to develop those skills as . And I'm using all those skills and monetizing them now with what I'm doing today. I love it. You sure are. You sure are. Having fun, man. , and we all have this within us. We all have unique gifts and talents. And this is important more today than ever. . Is, , there's this idea of a personal brand and it's really about you as a person. Yes. And doing that internal investigation, that self-assessment to look at , what do I love? What would I do for free? And, , if I didn't even get paid for it, I would love to do all the time. For me, strangely, it didn't just land in my lap, though. It was still putting yourself in position. I had overcome my own health challenges and transformed my body and my health. And somebody asked me for help at the gym. They saw me. They saw my transformation. , this was actually outside of the gym, but they saw me on campus. It was a friend of mine's sister who was going to the school. And she was just , can you help me? And I literally was , , I'll meet you at the gym on Saturday. She was , how much should I pay you? What? what? I get paid to do this? You would pay me to do what I would do anyways. And what are those things that you love to do? , maybe it is , and again, we do want to get off the couch a little bit, but maybe it is Netflix, ? . . How can you monetize that? How can you, you can create a podcast around reviews, ? Create merchandise around it. , maybe find some licensing thing, ? Some of the biggest podcasts are watch parties of TV shows. Yes. Again, monetizing what they love. It's just watching and talking about it. . Maybe you, maybe you are obsessed with My Little Pony. Maybe you, , you, you love a certain sports team. Pokemon or something. Pokemon. Pat Flynn. He's crushing it, dude. what Pat Flynn is doing? Of course. It's amazing. I watch it. I don't even Pokemon. I watching his stuff. It's crazy, man. He did this as an experiment about a little over a year ago. He's crushing it. Him and I are in a mastermind, which another one of your, let me go back. . Mastermind habit. The mastermind habit. Habit number four is the mastermind habit. And I'm going to, Pat Flynn and I are in a mastermind for about seven years now. We talk every Monday. Wow. ? That's great. And to see his growth and what he did, as a, a side thing, a Pokemon channel that now has, it's getting close to probably two million subscribers. Crushing, dude. And I know about the behind the scenes, what it's doing for his life. Crushing. And for his financial business. It's bringing him joy too. Yes. He loves it. You can't put a price on joy and freedom. . You can't. You could have all the money in the world, but you could also have no money and have joy and freedom inside of you. . And he has much joy because he's leaning into his passion and his curiosity. These hidden skills inside of him that he probably never thought he could monetize. . Not only is he monetizing them financially. But spiritually and emotionally, he's monetizing that joy. And that is an incredible currency. Absolutely. And again, I just encourage everybody, take some time. If this is important to you, take some time, write out what you're passionate about. What are the things, what are the top 10 things that you love? Yes. That you love to do, you love about life. Write those things down and look at what are some ways that I could potentially monetize my passions. And it's not always going to work out that, but maybe the thing that you are doing is helping you to spend more time doing those passions. Yes. And that's a job you're not necessarily passionate about, but there's also this other tentative. How you do anything is how you do everything. Yes. And having that carry over. But all the details are here. Make Money Easy. Make Money Easy from my really, really good friend and recently married- That's it, baby. Recently married, Lewis Howes. Let everybody know where they can pick up a copy. Get it anywhere, makemoneyeasybook.com or go to Amazon and check it out there. I love you, man. Love you too, man. Appreciate you. Appreciate you. Thank you for putting this together. Thank you. Thank you for putting this together for us. It's not just about money. It's about healing. It's about healing. And I love that inroads into this. Make Money Easy. Pick up your copy today. Hey, if you this video, make sure to check out this video here. Time and attention. We have a limited amount of both, but the most important thing that we have is not necessarily our time. It's our focused attention. what's the one thing that if I do that morning, the rest of the day is kind of a win. And the first thing for me is really working out.