Today we're going to be talking about why it might be really difficult for you to have really healthy authentic relationships when you struggle with codependency most oftentimes you don't know it people don't Normally think about codependency as a program. They don't normally recognize how Codependency is a subconscious program that your mind is literally built before the age of seven to behave a certain way and to React to certain situations and certain triggers a certain way We don't usually consider how being codependent is tied to our childhoods. What did you observe in childhood? What kind of mom did you have did you have a mom who is a people pleaser? Did you have a dad who was highly narcissistic or vice versa? Did you grow up with parents who were not emotionally regulated? Did you grow up feeling invisible? Did you grow up feeling not good enough? Did you grow up in this paradigm that? Made you feel you were sub subordinate to other people that you didn't have a to a self Now when you grow up in this type of a situation, you're not anchored to the self You don't become self actualized. You don't become self Individualized how could you in order to become self actualized and self individualized? You would have needed a healthy parent a healthy authority figure outside of you That was able to make you feel whatever was going on inside of you was enough Now when you grow up in a home where you feel invisible You have to understand that you're you're part of a certain system You're part of a particular paradigm and this paradigm can be completely corrupt Everybody can be running a mop Muck mom could be reacting to dad could be reacting to mom, , your sister could be highly emotional? Everybody's trying to manage and control your sister Your brother might be drinking your sister might be a heroin addict There can be many things going on in your family and no one's paying attention to How people feel on an authentic level how you feel on an authentic level? Everybody's a bunch of atoms or molecules that have been heated up and they're bouncing off of each other No one's calm No one's serene. There's no stillness in Order to develop a self you need stillness You need peace you need time for your mind to understand and connect with your emotional body. Who am I? What am I what is this? I when everybody mom and dad your sister your brother aunts uncles Are everyone's reacting to? someone else's behavior Where is the eye? There's just reactivity and you don't realize that when you come from a home that You're really taught to not have an eye. codependency is really a loss of selfhood. You have no eye I mean you do but it hasn't been Fully developed you haven't hit certain milestones in your life, codependency is really a journey of becoming your own eye and How you become your own eye is you have to break through the program you have to break through? The family system you have to break through the hologram That is running your life that many of us are running and we don't even recognize that we're running it was a huge aha moment in my life when I when I was told by my therapist that You are in fact codependent and the way you were raised in childhood is the reason you are codependent at the time I had no idea what that meant and what I did was I set myself out on a journey to read everything I'd Could about codependency But what I found that I was missing was , how do I fix it? How do I fix it and then I realized that the only way to fix it was to really get inside my subconscious mind and Recognize the patterns that were running around in my head the behaviors that were habitual The my triggers the way that I responded to people my emotional set point I talked about the emotional set point in quantum tools to help you heal your life now. It's a book I wrote about the law of attraction And how we are all living out a paradigm and until you awaken to the paradigm the movie The Matrix you will stay Subordinate you will expect someone else to come around and to save you I think what happens to a lot of us as children if we have this mother wound if we suffer this and most of Us do come on. Come on. Growing up is difficult being abandoned and being expected to go have all the answers to all of your problems is It's a difficult thing to Accept full responsibility for yourself and not make someone else your savior, which is what codependents do I'm waiting to I'm waiting If I do this for this person, then this person will love me, ? If I do this then I am being I am enough. It's sort of , , someone else is my god and the Bible says, , don't put false gods before me, , you can't have a false god before you I'm you can't you have to really merge with yourself and merge with your own personal God the God that created you and you have to take do what you can to make sure that you're running your life based on what feels authentic for you and Ultimately what feels authentic for everybody in my humble opinion is love if we can return to love of ourself then we will become natural repellents for narcissists because a narcissist needs a people pleaser a narcissist needs somebody who has high empathy a Narcissist needs somebody who is going to forego their own experience for the sake of pleasing this other person that this other person will love them and take care of them and make them feel enough healing from codependency if you're struggling with codependency and that is your this is your mindset This is your default setting, I talked about in the road back to me if this is your default If this is what you've been programmed to do, you're not going to be able to have healthy authentic relationships. It's an Impossibility Because you have an authentic relationship with another you have to have an authentic relationship with the self now to have a healthy relationship Which I am grateful that I was able to go from a codependent mindset to an inter pen Interdependent mindset when I was codependent I really did lean on my ex-husband and he did lean on me And it was if he fell I fell or if I fell he fell we were we were leaning on one another It was not Healthy it was enmeshed, in the road back to me I talked about how there was this moment of accountability when I was reading melody Beatty's book codependent no more where I recognized I am in this triangle experience where , I am not taking care of myself I am taking care of his needs and I'm expecting him to take care of my needs I was not taking care of myself in that experience and then when he did not Read my mind or he didn't do what I expected him to do I felt wounded and I felt I had a to feel wounded which peeling back and recognizing that cycle I it was a dysfunctional cycle and When I saw it when I was , oh, that's what this thing is. That's why I'm unhappy That's why , I'm never going to be happy because I essentially married someone who told me to my face I never think about your feelings I was abandoning me And I married somebody who was emotionally avoidant who lacked empathy and who felt entitled to call me names Especially when I wanted to address a particular situation that we were having in our family , , I was burning the candle at both ends and that's what codependents do they abandon themselves and then they manifest partners that are incapable of Seeing them but at the end of the day, it's going to come down to you stopping the cycle Which is scary because part of healing from codependency is what melody Beatty writes about there's no rescue boat coming it's all on you sweetheart, you can stomp your feet and you can be angry but until there is some aha moment and the second part of my coaching program is accountability. We talked about how a codependent person who yes has been wounded And has been sucked into this matrix that was in play long before You ever got to planet earth to your one and now you're in this family system. That's dysfunctional now you're in a family system. You're in a dysfunctional societal system and many of your friends are in the same system and everyone thinks of doing everything , but no one's happy now unhappiness becomes the norm. who's looking within ? You usually have to suffer much pain and you go through many Narcissistically abusive relationships to the point where you realize I have nowhere else to go but up I am the common denominator and that's really difficult because to have a healthy relationship with another person You must have some sense of accountability what have I done? where do I fit in all of this without this aha moment? Oh this moment of accountability of clarity have I been giving my power over to someone some people will struggle because they'll say, , Lisa You're blaming the victim I'm trying to liberate somebody who has been a victim of narcissistic abuse I am trying to help someone and some people hear it and some people won't but I'm trying to help that person who grew up In a dysfunctional family system your family was dysfunctional your family was dysfunctional. You may have been affected by alcoholism You may have been affected by narcissism Unconsciousness living a subconscious life your grandparents could have been the most abusive people in the world and Now your parents are living out that paradigm bouncing off of each other trying to get their needs met with one another angry irritable resentful hyper Hypersensitive to criticism then they have children who have needs and they resent the children who have needs You're the third generation of this nonsense and you're stuck and what do you do? You've never learned to honor yourself. Why because mom and dad didn't honor themselves They were never honored and they never taught you are enough You were born Enough and you have the to break through this matrix break through this subconscious pattern and live an authentic life You have that to do that is difficult when I was at my dining room table and I got to that section of melody baby's book I slammed it shut. It was this moment where it was You're part of this. It's not your fault that you're part of it. You've been sucked into this paradigm, but only you can get yourself out And that's why I think a big piece of codependent recovery that's missing at least when I was in therapy I went to four or five therapists before I found the one psychotherapist that said you're codependent But even then it was , , what do I do to fix it? and it was through my own work through learning about psychology learning about hypnosis learning about quantum mechanics it's not me. It's my programming I have to fix my programming and if I can fix my Programming I can naturally align with me The question is how do I reverse engineer and get back to my true self which is what the 12-week? Online class the breakthrough class that I offer is all about is returning people back to the self How do I get there? But this you cannot and I hope people hear this because in order to have an authentic relationship With another person you can't escape accountability You have to be responsible for your own self feelings and it gets messy because if I have to accept my own feelings I have to give up on this fantasy that Prince charming is gonna write in on the white horse and save me I think this comes from , yes growing up many of us, growing up watching things Walt Disney and , little boys want to be the prince that rescues the girl that has all these problems and little girls want to be rescued by the prince that's strong and has his white horse and make I think that fantasy Is really reinforced if you have been abandoned by mommy if you have been abandoned by daddy And if there is this abandonment this moment of , why have you forsaken me? it kind of and that doesn't get healed that doesn't get resolved. you're always seeking this Savior which is mom was supposed to save you a dad was supposed to save you this external person Was supposed to save you entered this world connected to your mother on an umbilical cord? And then they cut it. There you go kid. Welcome to planet Earth and all it's dysfunctional crap, , that's what happens really Oh my god, everybody's asleep. , everybody's asleep everyone's trying to Read everybody else's mind and everybody wants someone else to make them feel better and lions and tigers and bears Oh my and I'm not allowed to feel my feelings. I might get judged for feeling my feelings. I might experience more abandonment I don't want to do that. What's the answer? Don't feel don't feel don't feel don't feel your feelings Pretend fawn people please become a chameleon become what people you think people want you to be never ever say no , it's this fear of additional abandonment, ? what is metaphorically? What do little girls and little boys do they fantasize about being the rescuer of somebody who has all these problems? That's nice or they fantasize about being rescued and then guess what? Nothing works dear ones You are on Planet Earth you go through your 20s your 30s your 40s your 50s. I coach people who are in their 70s I one time coach somebody was in their 80s, , you go through life No one ever tells you or you don't it doesn't hit it doesn't land that oh there's this thing called codependency and you might be subconscious you might be living out a subconscious pattern and You may be, attracting People in your life that mirror the experiences that you had in childhood The exact child experiences childhood experiences you loathed That you loathed that have made this energetic imprint on your being or exactly what you manifest, ? Isn't that interesting? Isn't that interesting and that's why with my online coaching class and my books codependent? The codependency manifesto was just released. I talked about you have to awaken. This is a real thing This is a subconscious pattern and if you want to have an authentic relationship With someone else you are deserving of that But you cannot do it if you're still part of the old matrix the old paradigm Which is your dysfunctional family and your dysfunctional family's family and on and on Life is a hologram dear ones and karma is real karma is not about punishing you It's the law of cause and effect there is a wheel and it's churning and the only way to have an authentic relationship with anyone else is to begin waking up and part of the awakening Process is accountability and then you can experience ascension That's essentially my online class is the awakening phase accountability and ascension And this is the way that we free ourselves from this codependent matrix now Accountability is a big issue for some people because that means I have to look at myself That means I have to give up all of these fawning behaviors. I have to give up people pleasing. Who am I without this people pleasing? Oh What happens when I say no people are gonna get pissing and they're gonna walk away then what then you're experiencing the exact thing You never wanted to experience which was which is being abandoned and you're triggered again, ? healing from codependency is really getting into that nitty-gritty space and Recognizing that is a natural occurrence. Your brain is wired to fear this abandonment But if you stick with it If you learn how to process your emotions If you learn how to stay in your body, in my class I talk about Amy the amygdala and Harry the hippocampus , you've got to learn to observe these experiences in your brain that are natural that are going to trigger a limbic response That's where the nitty-gritty is, , some people talk about doing yoga. Some people talk about mindfulness. It's all helpful Anything allows you to stay in your body while you're experiencing the CPTSD response to rejection and that's why people please, ? That's what people fall on we have to recognize that is manipulative It is controlling if I do what you want me to do and I don't want to do it I dishonor myself and if you haven't read the works of Nathaniel Brandon I do suggest you do it honor the self or honoring the self, ? It's an amazing book if I cater to you and I do something that you want me to do even the I don't want to do it. What am I doing? You become my god Now, why am I making you my god? I'm making you my god because I don't want you to reject me I want to be in your good graces. Keep going. Why is that because I'm afraid you'll abandon me because if I'm afraid I will be alone. And if I'm alone, what does that mean lions and tigers and bears it means Everything's my responsibility. if I sink I sink if I swim I swim now it is going to be harder for Some people versus other people to heal from codependency That is just a fact and that is not oh, saying that , saying that oh some people have a to stay stuck versus other people. I'm not it's not about a . It's just a fact, in my coaching class we have run through various types of abuse and trauma and It is a lot when people start opening up and they start explaining why they? are codependent why They are afraid to confront people why they are afraid to say no. Oh my word It is horrendous what has happened in people's lives And I think it's really important that we do recognize that it's going to be Harder for some people to , , wake up and , , what do I need to do here? Are you kidding me? You're a mom you have four children. You're in a narcissistically abusive relationship You are financially dependent On this person who has isolated you from friends and family you have and this has happened this brainwashing has happened over time Your mind is no longer your own. Your life is run by fear, ? You may have experienced horrific abuse your children may begin now have emotional problems or behavioral issues and , the matrix is that thick lock lots of muck and mire and lots of patterns, ? Get escaping that is not going to be easy I think it's important, when we're talking about codependent recovery that if you're somebody who is in a dire experience recognize that number one. It's not your fault. You're in that experience. It's not your fault that you were born into this Matrix that is mostly subconscious. It's not your fault. They're born into a family that is subconscious It's not your fault that below the age of seven you're in a hypnotic brainwave stage state and you're being taught this stuff It's not your fault that You went out into the world at 12 13 14 looking to be rescued that's not your fault That's what everybody does everybody wants to be rescued by someone else until you Recognize that it doesn't work that when you are someone who wants to be rescued and the illusion is that if I rescue you Then I'm good enough, but I think it's a little bit deeper than that I think it's if I rescue you somehow in that I'm rescued by the rescuing of you, which means I'm still Not rescuing myself on a very deep level and this journey towards having an authentic relationship with someone else is going to be more difficult For some people than others that is just a fact that means what does that mean? That means it might take you longer to heal from codependency to change your subconscious programming You're talking about neural wiring I did an interview with Bruce Lipton years ago And he confirmed what I'm saying I did an interview with Dr. Bruce Perry who said that the first year of life is critical because that's when the brain is wiring itself for socialization for the ability to trust people and it's not your fault if you are suffering with codependency And you continue to attract people who take advantage of your emotions But until you awaken and you realize where the power is the power is within you to begin at least slowly shifting it and Step one is awakening step one just awaken this is my issue This is what I'm doing I if you're someone who gets stuck in anger because you do for other people And they're not doing in return for you have to see that because as long as you're angry you're attached and as long as you're angry you're in resistance and as long as You're in resistance. You're actually reinforcing this reality with the matrix guess what's going to happen more people show up that make you angry angry Is a valid emotion, but we have to learn to process it and move it out of your body resentment normal emotion if you are doing something that you've always done and You think people should respond to you a certain way It's the meaning that you give to that doing it's the meaning that you give to fawning It's the meaning that you give to enabling . I did that for her. I paid her rent She should want to cat sit for me I paid her rent or I rescued her a couple of years ago From this catastrophic relationship that she had she should answer the phone if I call her at 1 a.m. And 2 a.m. And 3 a.m. Or whatever it's this expectation that a lot of us carry as Codependents who don't realize that we're we're we're saying please take care of me. I took care of you Please take care of me in return, there's this there's this need for us to become self-actualized Which is a very grown-up thing to do which is very? scary And I don't think it's our fault I really don't I speak because we're taught that we need other people just to get through life we're taught to rely We're taught to need we're taught to put our Faith into other people and other things and God forbid we go against the grain and we actually are individuals with their own thought process God forbid we have an individual thought you're persecuted if you don't go along with this faith Then someone else comes along and says you're no good or if you don't go along with that fashion trend then people look down at you We're all conditioned to have these types of experiences and the only thing that's going to help us is if we awaken And if you're having this moment I did at my dining room table where it's just wow I do this thing I do this thing I didn't realize I did this thing and I'm recognizing it was a subconscious pattern But my power lies in being able to break through this thing break through this programming to see to really take the blinders off and see how my childhood affected me am I struggling with CPTSD? what is this fawning and people-pleasing and enabling and rescuing and catering and fixing is it I Don't experience more pain Am I in my adult life continuing this experience that I had with my mother with my father with my sister with my coaches with My teachers this please don't hurt me experience please you have the final say over whether or not. I am worth no Do you want you're not if you are worthy just as you are? But you can't awaken from that until you until you see that you might be doing that in order to have an authentic relationship with someone else you have You have to have an authentic relationship with yourself, and having an authentic relationship with yourself means becoming accountable for yourself. it's slowly learning how to love yourself, ? You're not waiting for someone else to love you anymore. It's slowly replacing negative talk with positive talk. You're not waiting for the postman to say, wow, Lisa, you got your hair done. You look great. You're not. No, you are affirming yourself. You're not waiting for your best friend to say, oh, you just got that promotion at work. That's awesome. ? You're not begging someone see me, someone see me anymore. No, you're not two anymore. You're not three anymore. You have a to affirm yourself. it really is a dissolution of these psychic cords, , to dysfunctional patterns. It really is coming face to face with these dysfunctional attachments to the matrix that is running your life. And you don't even realize that. You're running it. It is everything. Why do you wear the clothes that you wear? Is it because you think someone in the matrix is going to think you're more important? Are you trying to tell people, look, I have this bag or I wear these shoes and it's because I want you, which is you trying to control someone else's perception of you, which is you really not taking responsibility. Listen, you want to go buy an expensive bag because you can. That's awesome. And it's great quality. It's amazing. But don't make buying that bag about someone else because that's you attaching to the matrix. That's you acting in a codependent way, ? If you want to get a new job because you just want to get a new job and it's going to bring in more money and you want your children to take piano lessons, that's awesome. But you don't do that because doing that says, you believe that, it says in your culture that means that you're doing good or that you're good or you're better than. Again, it's codependency. That's making other people your God. You're worth it. You're worth it. You're worth it. You're worth it. You're worth it. You're worth it. You're worth it. That's codependency. And it's not an attitude to yourself. That's codependency is coming from other people, it's important that you recognize that. Am I people-pleasing? Am I fawning? Am I wearing this red dress to dinner because I want this person to say, wow, that's a beautiful red dress? Or am I wearing this red dress because it pleases me? We have to return back to the I. We have to return back to accountability. And when we do that, when we take responsibility for ourselves and we end up at a place where we're loving ourselves. That's when we can be responsible. more authentically loving with other people. That's when the need to judge people and the need to fear people begins to dissolve and it doesn't happen over time. It does not happen over time. What happens over time is that as you begin to trust yourself, as you begin to affirm yourself, as you begin to ask yourself, what do I think? What do I feel? What do I need? How do I feel about what this person said? Rather than going into a fawning response or a people pleasing response or an agreeable disposition when someone says something to me that makes me think that I've done something wrong and guilt has been triggered in me, rather than go into a making sure that this person still loves me response, rather than that, maybe ask myself how I feel about what this person said and how I feel about feeling this guilt. Can I just sit with this fear? Can I just sit with the guilt? Can I not react to the guilt? The other day. My husband wanted to have steak for breakfast. He has some irritable bowel issues. It's really not that important. The issue is that I put the steak when he went shopping in the freezer and he woke up and he wanted to have the steak for breakfast. He's on a protein diet. And I said, oh, I put the steak in the freezer and the look in his eyes was, oh, now I have to defrost it. It crushed me and it shouldn't. The program is still active. Now there's two people. The first one is . I know everybody coconut has been sent through tailored thinking. There's no pain lying. They're consuming lock and seem to have semua. These are human skills and they must cannot live with their in indices. The second result is they're jealous, ? That's what I find. then I think is a reallyoooara little helped that doesn't happen at all. I think we all do it a bit. When I look at myself. All . 10 minutes. guilted for everything I was made to feel I was insignificant I with my mom I was treated with indifference I felt my father loved me to a certain point but my father didn't protect me and shield me from what was happening within my mother but at least I felt I at least daddy loves me but still as I'm 55 and I work on this stuff every single day because I know it is everywhere this pattern is everywhere this subconscious reality is everywhere you talk to people and you'll start to realize oh they're asleep that's not judging that's discerning oh I made my husband a wonderful dinner and he came home late and he didn't even acknowledge that I trim that I trim the rose bush in the front of the house and he didn't acknowledge that I threw away the flowers that were in the bedroom because they started to get musty there's this I'm doing all these things that I'm doing to make sure that I'm not making a mistake and I'm not doing all these things that I'm doing to make sure that I'm not making a mistake matrix and you are not acknowledged that acknowledging them and it's your fault that I feel this sense of self alienation lions and tigers and bears oh my this is good intentions gone awry or someone would argue are they really good intentions because if you're doing something for someone because you expect them to fill you up is that really a good intention and it's difficult when you're struggling with codependency when you get to this point where you're trying to figure out how to change your point where , , oh, , I took my daughter or I gave my daughter, I talked about this in the codependency manifesto. you throw your 16 year old or your 17 year old, a huge pool party. And , all the friends go home and your kid's tired and she goes to sleep and the whole time you're seething and you're seething because you didn't get enough pictures with your daughter on Instagram, or she didn't praise you enough. That is dysfunctional, ? that is feeling a victim, feeling a martyr. It was your response. You threw this party that cost you five grand. , you made that decision. And we have to learn as people to do things because we authentically want to, not because we want something in return. Anytime you do something and you want something in return, you are addicted to that thing, that return. You don't want to be addicted to that return. Codependency is about being addicted to something outside of the self. Codependency is about relying and depending on something outside of the self to act the rescue boat, which is what Melody Beatty talks about. There is no rescue boat coming, dear one. And that is frightening. When I realized there was no rescue boat coming, I was deep, I was waist deep. I was chest deep in this relationship, ? I quit nursing school. My ex-husband sold our business. I lived in a house that him and his family built. His mother lived around the corner. His two brothers lived across the street. His sister lived around the corner. I was surrounded. I was enmeshed in this matrix of dysfunction. And I had three little kids, , 11, 9, 3, , and I had to get us out. That was terrifying. I can see why people go, no, I'm not looking at this. No, no, I'm not looking at this. I am not looking at this. I am not going through what I have to go through. I am not going through what I have to go through. I am not going through to extract myself from this paradigm. And it literally is a paradigm shift. And the shift first happens in your head. And you begin to realize that you were living one paradigm that was a subconscious paradigm. And then as the shift begins to happen in your head, you begin to slowly string together. If you stay on the path with codependent recovery, you begin to string together a new paradigm. It might be a little bit of a confuse, but it might be a little bit of a take you longer than some people to string together that new paradigm. I made my life, , I can't say it made it worse. While I was making my life better, I still fell because at the time of my awakening, it was a false awakening because I was , oh, I'm codependent. Melody Beatty says I'm codependent. My therapist says I'm codependent. , I must be codependent. Codependent no more says I'm codependent. , that's me. But I didn't realize that the codependency in me was my subconscious programming. I thought my relationship with my ex-husband was codependent. I thought that he was more avoidant. I was the more, I was, , I'm talking Pia Melody language now. I thought that he was more avoidant and I was more the pursuer. I realize now it's much deeper. in terms of the spectrum between codependency and narcissism, I was more codependent and he was more on the narcissistic spectrum. But neither of us were freaking healthy. That's not healthy. You want out of that spectrum to be a good person. you want interdependence you want independence you want self-reliance self accountability, Self-responsibility you want to be completely in control over How you think and what you feel and what you do you want to extract yourself the thing is though while you're in to The two paradigms that meantime is where you're going to need a lot of tools And I do recommend the work of codependent no more melody Beatty. I do recommend Love addiction or facing love addiction by Pia melody. I do recommend the work of Nathaniel Brandon honoring the self I do recommend that and if anyone's really want to investigate the program that I put together. It's codependent recovery And it's all about rewiring your subconscious mind you can break through and we go from having this experience of being seriously codependent and Childlike in our relationships, and what you can be a lawyer A doctor you can be the most successful business person in the world and still be codependent you have to understand It's it's this happens to anybody and everybody and to really free ourselves from The societal codependent program which I've been talking about this for years that We're asleep and until you're talking to someone it's the matrix Bruce Lipton says the matrix was actually a documentary It's not fiction. It's real When you start to awaken from codependency you see codependency everywhere you see subconscious programs everywhere you begin to see this subordinate relationship with fawners and people pleasers and codependents and more Narcissistic people this giving my over to this other person you start to see it everywhere you start to see it everywhere And it's mind-boggling and it's it can be frightening which is why I think people who understand It's coming together even if it is online with a support system people that understand your new language, ? That's why coda is powerful my first coda meeting. I walked out of there I was flying high. I was These people get me they get my language They understand it when I went to a few a meetings with my uncle who was Sober for his sober for many years and he asked us to go to a couple of meetings with him I was I get this language people are taking accountability they're Recognizing that they were part of this and there are skills here to learn and to have an authentic relationship With someone else dear one. I know it sounds cliche You have to have an authentic relationship with the self you cannot have a healthy body Unless you eat healthy you cannot have a healthy mind unless you consume healthy information You cannot have a clean house unless you clean your house, ? You cannot have a car that runs one of the Things that I've I've insisted on my children, and I'm happy it's a little thing, but it's a huge thing I've told my children you have to get an oil change every 3,000 miles Make sure you get an oil change you want your car to last you get an oil change every 3,000 miles You make sure that you take care of your car that is self accountability self responsibility. you want to have an organized mind Jordan Peterson says make your bed. It starts with making your bed, ? I think Codependency if you want to have a healthy relationship that is not a codependent relationship There has to be some shift in your head where you understand maybe I It's not my fault that I'm here because of the way the world is structured. It's a paradigm. It's a subconscious paradigm karma is real The Bible says the sins of the father fall on the son It's not your fault if your father was an alcoholic if your mother was a narcissist or a rageaholic And you grew up fawning as a way to Actually survive your circumstances and now it's become a pattern of behavior and because the brain is more subconscious than it is conscious It's not your fault that you're in a terrible relationship today. It's not your fault. , but once you can get past this, It's not my fault. That's gonna help any shame trigger , I think that there are There have been plenty of people who shame people with codependency and I just don't I'm not an advocate of shaming anyone for being what they are, And even narcissism if , it was a huge Awakening moment when I finally realized that my father was the way he was because he was a victim of narcissistic abuse That doesn't mean that I excuse narcissistic abuse It just means that there's a level of clarity around My dad that I have now that I didn't have before and when I didn't have it before I was stuck in anger and resentment why are you this way? And then when I began to pull back, And I did ? Enlightenment work and mindfulness training I was , This is the matrix, , and this is a paradigm and it's not for me to decide when he awakens it's for me to use this experience to kick myself out of this paradigm with him and Learning to become non-resistant because he at the end of the day if we're talking law of attraction You want to be non-resistant because things that you are in resistance to persist in your life, which is really difficult Which means that there has to be some ego training ego managing? In order to have a more authentic relationship with yourself Because your ego is going to tell you things should be this way and when things are not this way you're gonna suffer And when you say things are this way and I need to accept that things are this way because I can't control the thing That is this way then you will suffer less but We also need to get over this thing because I think a lot of us think that human beings shouldn't suffer or that There's no reason that you should suffer you're born you're going to suffer, , people are going to get sick People are going to die you're going to get sick, , or you could get sick It can happen to any of us look what just happened with kovat, , people get into car accidents, People cheat they abandon you, , your parents get older you watch them die anything your pets die at the loss is a part of life We need to embrace this as a natural process But the ego when we think about death and dying and people dying it it kicks up Survival stuff in us, the root chakra Gets activated we don't think this we don't want to experience this suffering. We don't want to which is the ego No, and I'm not going I'm not doing it. I'm not doing I'm not taking the castor oil I don't want the penicillin it hurts it hurts ego doesn't want to experience that's why some higher self Some awareness some expansion and consciousness must be a part of the recovery process that you can speak to the ego You can speak to the younger self and say it's , this is a natural process I watched a story about a woman last night who was shot nine times by her husband who then turned the gun on his children and who then Shot himself and this woman is has had a rebirth and she's looking forward to the second part of her life She's grieved for many years and now she's looking forward to she's found a new relationship and she actually wants to have more children I mean this is amazing But this is a woman that had to go through a rebirth of Non-resistance to what was that she can experience joy in the in the rest of her life Which is her taking accountability for how she felt not taking accountability for what her husband did but taking accountability for what was in her as a result of what this other person did that is Resiliency that is accountability and again this doesn't happen overnight. if you want to have a more authentic relationship I would to offer you a couple of things number one You have to recognize the codependent patterns in you, ? You have to see and my codependent where am I subordinate to other people? Where do I people please? Where do I fawn? Where do I give up my to feel what I feel? Where am I afraid to set a boundary? That's very important. identify the patterns in your life Look in your childhood, , what did my parents model for me? Very important because you are a product of your environment, ? you there might be some? Biological stuff going on but in my humble opinion our programs are really mostly the result of environmental factors But what were you taught? Were you taught that your feelings weren't? Important did your mother was she subordinate to your father? Did your mother leave you alone and your father leave you alone for many hours and when they came home? Did they treat you with indifference? where you take into the doctor when you needed medical care or were your feelings completely? Just irrelevant where you adopted where you adopted? To a kind family or an unkind family were you in foster care where you bounced around a lot? Did you experience childhood trauma? What type of trauma was there anyone there to help you process the trauma? Did people ignore the trauma? look in your past for these types of patterns because these types of experiences are going to lend themselves to Being a being a people pleaser or being someone who's afraid to feel their feelings, ? Which in order to experience an authentic relationship? You've got to be able to feel your feelings because you need balance and you need to be able to feel your feelings. Because you need boundaries with other people your feelings tell you where you are in relationship to someone else And if you don't know if you don't have the confidence and the resiliency and the trust in yourself and again, this is a process That's why I take people through a 12-week process in my class This does not happen overnight because you have to learn how to do this You have to change your patterns and programs in order to come through this in a healthy way, ? you're recognizing these patterns in yourself. You're looking at childhood You're connecting the dots, ? Number two start seeing yourself as your own rescuer you higher self is going to rescue you are going to be parent yourself. You are going to be the mother you always deserve the father you always deserved You're gonna nurture yourself and you're gonna protect yourself not in a defiant way, but in a beautiful loving way, ? You don't need to go, accuse people of being narcissists and Go after them on social media and persecution You don't need to do that because that keeps you stuck in the Matrix the more resentful the more frustrated you are and there's a time there's a season for being frustrated that helps you Identify your eye and create a boundary, but it's really important that anybody hear me anybody that wants to be free of this matrix and moving past resentment and anger and persecution and all that is The goal because if it's not the goal you stay tethered to this karmic wheel it just is what it is It's the paradigm we're all born into , but through awakening doing breaking through the paradigm That's where your personal power resides. That's where you can change everything in your life. Start saving yourself, ? ask yourself. Am I am I rescuing this person and why? , is this my responsibility to take care of this person's, drug issue. Is it my responsibility to Rescue this person from the their third DUI, , is it my responsibility to pay this person's rent? Is it my responsibility to cover for this employee who was out all night and wants me to lie to the boss? Is that my responsibility? This is really difficult stuff because guess what when you start saying no All of these attachments start to turn on you, ? That's why you need skills But these for the sake of this conversation I want to give you some advice I want to give you some tools to work on Start rescuing yourself. The third thing is that you can do is stop seeking external validation Be really honest with yourself. Where am I seeking validation? , I've always talked about this sub subconscious and subliminal hypno Hypnotism that takes place with advertisers, these people hires therapists psychiatrists and psychologists to Understand what triggers human survival, ? if I increase my level of attractiveness Am I increasing my worth versus someone else's worth and if I am where the hell did that paradigm come from? , I'm just asking people to think about why we're doing this. Where did this thing come from? That makes me feel my being more attractive and who says who by whose ruler is someone more attractive than someone else this gets really pretty When you start to think about why and you pull yourself you extricate yourself from the paradigm that the beauty industry has created when you extract yourself from the paradigm then it's Why am I doing this? ? What I'm trying to do is expand People's level of awareness that whatever you're doing you're doing because you want to do it, but know why you're doing it, ? Know why you're doing it, ? , it's important that we dig really deep and we ask ourselves And , I mean this is a rabbit hole, , this is this is such this is a rabbit hole of Us changing the actual world we live in , this is us, as individuals breaking through the matrix This is us saying I don't think I want to be a part of that anymore I want to be a part of this new earth that Eckhart Tolle talks about, I want to be part of a new paradigm and I'm gonna eat and I'm gonna exercise because I love it I want to be part of a new paradigm and I'm gonna exercise because I love every cell in my body Not because I want Joe at the gym to say hey your abs look great , I want to do it for me, I want to be a loving human being and love myself that I am a conduit of love I can be more loving to other people I want to not judge myself for who I am that I no longer have to wrestle with these feelings of not good enough and as I as I'm able to do that within myself I become less judgmental of other people again I'm not going to be a part of the cycle of love and this peace, , it is a rabbit hole But we have to start somewhere because If we stay unconscious and I do believe that this is what All the all the people that we know in this field the Eckhart Tolle is the Wayne Dyer's the Louise Hayes the Deepak Chopra's, The Joe dispensers and the people that we turn to help us figure out what is happening Essentially what we're trying to do is become less codependent and become more Self-actualized and more self-responsible and more accountable that we can eventually return to love that we are because if you're struggling in your relationships And they aren't authentic and they're painful and you tend to attract narcissistic people you may not recognize how you are giving up your power to it to an authority you're making someone else your authority and In the giving up of your authority you have to ask yourself, why am I doing this? Is it because you are afraid to feel your feelings? Which in my case, when I went down that rabbit hole, I realized that I was afraid to feel the unworthiness of childhood. I was afraid to feel the abandonment of not good enough. That's what I was really afraid of. I was afraid to face all of the feelings that I stuffed as a child when my mother raged at me, or my mother called me a bad girl, or she called me selfish. That pang of, I am not good enough. I didn't want to feel that. And I thought that if I rescued, if I catered, if I nodded my head, if I people pleased, and I had this fond response when people were upset with me, or I thought I was upset with me, I was avoiding all of that. And it wasn't until I reverse engineered, and that's what I teach in the 12-week class, the 12-week Breakthrough Coaching Program. It wasn't until I reverse engineered that I was able to break through that matrix, break through the subconscious programming, and become more accountable for my own self. And the amazing thing that happened was that I let people off the hook. You weren't responsible for making me happy anymore. You weren't responsible for whether or not my business did or did not do . You weren't responsible anymore for my weight, or how unhappy I was. I was learning to take responsibility for that. Now what happens a lot of times is when you make that shift, when you have that paradigm shift in your mind, the people that you're involved with. They don't it. They want you to fond. They want you to rescue. They want you picking up the phone. They want you saying yes, even though you mean no. They want you taking care of their kids. They want you lending them money. They want you to allow them to rage at you. They want you to allow them to cheat on you. They want you to allow them to mess with your mind, get you to doubt your reality. They want you to. And that's where I think we need the most tools, in that space where, -oh, it's happening. I'm feeling this. I'm feeling this stuff. It would be much easier if I just fond. Someone that I love very much in my family is in a 30-year relationship that is all about the fawning response. The getting rejected, and the thinking I'm going to leave, and then being afraid of leaving, and what does that mean, and going back into the cycle of fawning, people pleasing, and denial, and this unhappiness cycle. I'm not judging. I'm just explaining. I discern. I'm very grateful that I was able to kick myself out of that paradigm. I think that we need tools in that space. And it's not easy. And if you're somebody who has been trying to have an authentic relationship, and you've been trying to not be codependent, please understand that this is not a conscious journey. This is a journey that must take place in the subconscious realm. That's why my class includes meditations, healing theta brain web meditations, at least 13 of them. That's why there are 12 video lessons, and that's why if you take the active class, then the active live class includes 12 live streams with me. And those are weekly live streams in addition to impromptu live streams, and online support with my life coaches. if you take the evergreen class, then there is no live support, but you still get the 12 meditations, 13 meditations actually. You still get the 12 videos. You still get all of the information, the PDFs, the journaling prompts, and the homework assignments. You still get all of that. This is not a conscious journey. You need your conscious mind to activate. That's where your free will comes in. Will you make this choice to be codependent no more? Will you do what needs to get done to confront in yourself what needs to get confronted? That really is the question. Think about Shakespeare, to be or not to be. That is the question. Are you going to thrash against what's happening inside of you, or are you going to confront it? Are you going to learn how to sit with it? Are you going to allow the true self to become individualized and self-actualized in spite of other people rejecting you? Are you going to stop being subordinate? Are you going to be the true self and emerge the true self and be the sphinx that rises out of the ashes? Because that is the potential of every human being if you can have a more authentic relationship with yourself. And if you're interested in learning more about my 12-week class, whether it's the Evergreen class where you can take immediately or you wish to take the live class with me and my life coaches, go to www.lisaaromano.com backslash 12wbcp. And if you send me an email, I'll send you an email. At my support email, it's in the description box. I'll be glad to send you information. I'll send you a course outline. I'll send you a PDF. And we'll answer any questions you have to help you become codependent no more that you can live a more authentic life and become the true victor of your life. Because you deserve it. You're a human being. You have a divine self. You have a divine individualized self. You've got to break through your own paradigm, your own family, your own family paradigms. You've got to break through societal programs. You've got to break through. But once you do, you have the tools that you need to become your true self and to live out loud, to live your innate gifts and values and what's important to you. You have the ability to become a loving conduit of peace, of calm, of forgiveness and empathy. And that's when you become a cup of these delicious virtues and characteristics. And that's when you become able to offer that to other people. And guess what? Guess what? You can become a true self. You can become a true self. You can become a true self. You can become a true self. You can become a true self. And the more you do that, the less codependent we are, the less narcissists exist on planet earth because a narcissist needs a partner to play this narcissistic dance out with. And the less codependent you are, the more self-actualized you are, the more excited you get about accountability, ? The more authentic your relationships will be, the less you'll attract narcissists into your life and the more confident you'll have in your life to attract the life that you always deserved. This is your destiny. To awaken and to be true. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. This is your destiny. This is your destiny to break through. Thank you much for being here. Namaste, as I bow to the love and the light that is absolutely in you. Don't forget to think. You have a brain for a reason. Use it. Reprogram it if you have to. Reprogram it if you have to. But make sure you use it. Namaste. Until next time, bye for now. If you love this content, check out the next video and don't forget to click the link below you can take the codependency quiz. In fact, narcissists are notorious for playing mind games. They are the ways in which a narcissist keeps us engaged. It's the way a narcissist speaks to us that makes us doubt our reality.