Hey guys, today I've got another amazing video about a hidden root cause of anxiety. Sometimes what looks anxiety is actually anger. And as I've explored this topic, I've found that it's really relevant to me because I'm not an angry person, of course. And then I look at myself and I find out, , maybe you should think about this, Emma. today I invited the amazing one and only Sarah Michelle to talk about anger as a root cause of anxiety. And she's a psychologist, substance abuse counselor, tons of experience, really wonderful. Can't wait to jump in to this topic with you today. , let's go. I think a lot of people don't think anger and anxiety are that connected, but are they? Yes, there's a zillion reasons why people get anxious and depressed. But to me, anger is significant. And I'm going to give you to start a few examples. Let's hear it. , of how I discovered this. . All . I'm in AA, , in Alcoholics Anonymous. I've been sober for 40 years. And one of the things you do when you first get sober is you do what's called an inventory. And I remember I saw myself as this very sweet, very nice, very kind human being. . I was becoming a therapist. I was in my early 20s. I'm 65 now. that's a long way. And I remember saying to my sponsor, she said, , you need to write down people you're angry at. And I said, geez, I'm not really aware of being angry at anyone. And she said, no, really, resentment is in the, there's a quote in the big book of AA, resentment is the number one offender of the alcoholic. And after a bunch of work with her, I ended up kind of, , I ended up getting a lot of money. I ended up getting a lot of money. I ended up getting a lot of money. I ended up getting a lot of money. I ended up getting a lot of money. I ended up getting in touch with some feelings. I didn't even feel anger. I just felt kind of an irritation. Bottom line to this story is 486 resentments later. . I was, oh my gosh, maybe I'm a little angry. But again, the thing to me was my presentation was anxiety. My whole life, I was kind of a low grade anxiety kid, , because of that. And I was too busy with my own business. And I was just kind of a little bit of a nuisance in the household, all that stuff. when I experienced things, it was either high anxiety, medium anxiety, low anxiety. But when I started to look at resentment and anger, anxiety started to go down. And when I process in that process, we can talk about how to do some of that work. When I did this process of the steps and got through a lot of those resentments, et cetera, I remember the thing was go sit with God for an hour was the assignment. and see what happens. And I remember feeling this liberation and freedom and calmness and peace that I hadn't felt in years. that's just one personal experience of being totally unaware that I had anger and resentment and feelings towards anybody in negative ways. And it was definitely in there manifested in other ways. P.S. it probably had a lot to do with my addiction. A couple of other examples with clients slash friends. I have a really good friend who's bipolar. We were together just recently, and I've heard this a zillion times before, and she was telling me how over the winter she had a hypomanic episode. And again, bipolar is a legitimate diagnosis, et cetera. We're not saying that. I said, , and again, this is one of my analyst mentor in graduate school always said this question, when did it start? Which I love. I said to her, gee, when did it start? When did the hypomanic episode begin? And she said, , to be honest, I was at work and this coworker, I asked her a question and she dismissed me and acted as though I was invisible. And that night I was feeling all this rage and I couldn't sleep. And then I was obsessively thinking, she said within three days I had a hypomanic episode. Now I'm not saying again, but I am saying correlation. I'm saying we get this rage and if we don't know how to process it or identify it or even experience it, it's going to come out in some other way. that was one other example. I'll just give you one last one. A client from years ago came to me for panic attacks. And again, I said, when did they start? And she said, they started three months after I had a hypomanic episode. And I said, , when did it start? And she said, after I had my third child. And I said, interesting. And I said, and, , we looked at hormonal, of course, she had seen a doctor, , the depression, postpartum depression, blah, blah, blah. And we started talking about anger a little bit. And she, oh, I start crying saying this. She got in touch with that. She really didn't want a third child. And she was enraged with herself and enraged with her husband. And until, oh my God, I have goosebumps. And until we kind of could get to that truth, she couldn't really get beyond it and literally stopped having panic, stopped having panic attacks. Because that piece of that awareness, I mean, and again, there's lots of reasons for panic. We're just connecting the anger piece. But to me, those examples and many more over the years just made me start really thinking about this unprocessed anger. And how is it? How can people me and Maratro trying to overcome the nutrition туpe? And I think it's , , important that we're trying to get into it yourself. I'm having a very high dose, high dose of, I don't know. I was a contact for social media where someone who's無 commonly talking about physical Beber Then I watched millions and millions and millions of children langevo fuerte And how is it connected? I mean, what do you see? Or what do you hear from folks on the channel? I don't know. , that's interesting. It's such an interesting thing. And I really want to go back to that third lady because I want to know , did she then what then what does she do? But we'll come back to that. , because I want to talk about processing it too. But I think , when you and I were talking last time, it helped me connect some dots because I think, , in the last 15 years, I probably had two anxiety attack, panic attack, not quite a panic attack, but an anxiety attack. Absolutely. And one of them was with this situation where I was not being assertive, I was just not being assertive. And that led to me just trying to be nicer, trying to be nicer and trying to be nicer. And I panic where I just lost it. I was , cannot sleep up on my creationist reaction formation, which is Freud's, Freud's defense exactly what you did. You did the opposite. Some people that feel rage, I'll just get nicer and nicer. Yes. I just say that. Go ahead. Oh, that's a good point. That's a good point. . . that's why I put back the feelings of anger. . . , and I think I think a lot of women, especially are conditioned that anger is always bad. It's always a bad emotion that we judge that feeling. And I think that prevents us from and I know men too are told not to be angry. Lots of people are told not to be angry, not to show anger. But with women, especially women tend to be more anxious and also more socially sensitive. Perhaps. Yes. it's if we can come to understand how to process through that anger piece, then maybe we can manage a lot of the stuff that's showing up as anxiety, which is fascinating to me. Absolutely. And I do have a list. The other thing we will definitely process that. I have a list of what I call symptoms of hidden anger. . Because I think you're . We may not know we're angry, but there are other signs that we could possibly be angry about. I think that's a good way to put it. I think that's a good way to put it. I think that's a good way to put it. sleeping a lot, depression, obviously, anxiety, addictions, controlling behavior, ? We're angry, blaming, criticizing people, focusing on others. These are going to sound strange people with monotone voices. people that are really. Is that reaction formation? that's you're trying not to express how angry you are. Very precious. I mean, I'm just saying pressure. . You'd believe shutdown, sarcasm, lateness. Busyness, avoidance, over accommodating the reaction formation. Forgetting. I had a client once forget to pick her husband up at the airport, but it turns out he never called her while he was away. I mean, it's , what I mean? . And then we'll get into body pain, stomach aches, back aches. That's the whole Sarno and Gabor Matej stuff, fatigue, trouble sleeping. , I mean, there's tons of ways it manifests in our lives that if we really thought to ourselves, Jesus. I'm angry about something that may be part of this presentation or profile. Interesting. . . That's fascinating. And I think a lot of people just eight or major young at someone. But our brains are super smart. our brains are good at avoiding suppressing, repressing, ? we are good at doing that with whatever, we will do anything to not have feelings that are uncomfortable. . What was the first word of that sentence? You just said. Voiding. Avoidance. . . Avoidance. Yes, absolutely. And you talk about a lot about that on your channel, , avoidance just creates the continuous cycle, ? . Absolutely. I look at this and again, you might agree or disagree with this, but if you take, I learned this years ago. a pyramid, ? Think of a pyramid. . And at the top, and this could be, we could switch places on this pyramid, but at the top is rage. say the top is rage. we know, we know people that are just in rage. We can see them. Underneath the rage, we have anger, irritation, agitation, , what are some other words for that? Grit and. Clingility. . Negativity, all that stuff. . Underneath that, sadness, grief. You could have anxiety in there too. Sadness and grief. Underneath that, fear, and there's fear. And you talk about the differences between fear and anxiety. I'm kind of using them almost the same way. That's . But the bottom, powerlessness. . I think there's really much to me of our activations in whatever way, ultimately, because we're feeling powerless over something. And there are people, and look at the way, I mean, we're not political, but look at everybody's just angry now. . ? Because to me, people are afraid and people feel powerless. . And anger becomes just the way to deal with that rather than focusing on, geez, what can I control? What can I control? What am I really angry about is another question. , I often say 99 of the times you're angry, you're really not angry about the present moment. I don't know if you believe that, but I can do an exercise with you too. We can do a couple of things around resentment and anger. . It's , anyways, there are ways to look at that. I just call them activations because I told you, I think really simply. . if I get activated. . If I get activated and it's much more intense than the present situation calls for, I say it's old. And mainly it's old. I buy that. I buy that. . It's . what I want to make sense of the present moment and make sense of the present moment and otherwise probably connected to something else. . That's pretty. I. , the woman at the coffee shop or whatever. It's not about the coffee shop. . Or whatever. . I mean, it can be because it can be because we have certain thought patterns. That are fueling it or certain judgments that are fueling it. But those are patterns that are usually built off of old hurts. Yes. They're all defensive. They're all defenses. . And it's great. You just said that because when I was doing this resentment work, I remember my sponsor saying behind every resentment is an old wound. really, if you looked at your resentments and of course, most of our resentments are towards our we talk to our caregivers. And when I do. This process with people, I say really you need to be as specific as possible. I have them write out the specific resentment and for some people. I just met with someone recently who says, oh my God, I can't get angry at my mother and her mother's been long gone. But the belief that I can't do that because it and I'm and to work through that to get through this is about freedom. Let's look at the reality. She's not here. This is an old. Feeling state that's causing you anxiety. But really we need to get to the heart and the anger underneath it, which there was a lot of that. . let me challenge that for a second. What's the point? What's the point of getting to all this hurt and resentment? , let's take you had 457 resentments or that lady who has an actual baby number three that baby is in her life and it's not going anywhere. Now. She knows I'm actually really angry that I had this baby. . How what does that do anyone any good? what do you do with that? Would it be better to just suppress all those feelings? Sarah? Number one. . What's up? The first point in looking at the resentment is in your exactly . The first point is recognizing. Oh my gosh, I'm super angry and just kind of bringing that to the surface to me is the first step. when I recognized, oh my God, I'm I'm carrying around these resentments and listen to this. The second part of that process. Is how is that resentment affecting my life? the second part of that process was there was a list. We were given self-esteem personal relations. My sex life, my sense of security in the world, my sense of security emotionally ambitions in the world. we looked at this list and people can think of other ways that affects them. But basically what we did is first step acknowledging the anger and the resentment. But then we looked at the second part of that process. Acknowledging the anger and the resentment. Second step was how is this affecting me? Because I think you're going to change something unless you really can identify that it's affecting your life. And to me, Emma, the most important thing is our relationships. . That's where all this unconscious resentment comes out. second piece, where is this affecting my life? Now, that is a very significant statement. Because when I saw this. . I'm thinking of myself. Just think about this for a second. 486 resentments affecting each one affecting how I feel about myself. that to me was mind blowing. Now, the most important part of this exercise is this. We do what's called the turner room. . Where the sentence is, we put the person in the category of the spirit of the person. We're in the category of the spiritually sick and we turn it to our own resentment. And we'll take a look at what is affecting me. What am I responsible for? What am I still carrying? Putting them out of our minds. Meaning I can't control what they're going to do. I can't control the past. I can't control that my dad did this to me. I can't control what my mom did this to me. But my inventory and my responsibility is. And my responsibility is, what can I do now? How can I look at this to really see that it's really affecting my life? And we do this exercise around, you ask yourself, what did you want in that incident? , I wanted my mother or father to be a particular way. Second question, did you have an unrealistic expectation? Did you expect them to be any different than who they were capable of being? , I had a resentment towards my mother who was an alcoholic. But really, could she be any way other than that? No. the resentment is my responsibility. I have to accept this is what she was capable of being. The really important cognitive pieces are, what is the lie I told myself? do I make up a story about this event that caused the wound and the anger? , and really, it's things , something's wrong with me. I'm not lovable. You try to focus on yourself. Not the other person. I'm not lovable. , I can't trust people, whatever. And then the other cognitive piece is, what's the truth? What's the real truth? I'm a child of God. I didn't cause my mother's alcoholism, et cetera, et cetera. Part three is, what do you do to get what you want? And where we're looking at here, what we're looking at here is behaviors we do that when we're unconscious to try to get our needs met, but it never works out. . Avoidance. Manipulation. Pouting. . Yes. Yelling, screaming. Scream and yell. Get angry. Blame. All of those. we look at, and then the really important piece is, the second part is, what's the underlying fear that drives the resentment? say I have a fear of not being loved or a fear of rejection or a fear of abandonment or whatever. If that fear gets triggered, it's going to cause me to get angry. It's going to cause the resentment. we're talking about a lot of different things, but the resentment and the anger, when that's all repressed and I'm hanging on to all that stuff, my system is going to be anxious because I'm not going to know what's going on. I'm just going to be kind of operating this. . . you're . There are ways, and I have at the end, we'll do, I have a list of tools that will be really helpful with anger. . And the other thing to say to people is this. Do. Do. Do a little exploration of your growing up. , how was anger expressed? Was anger expressed? Did your parents repress anger? What were the messages you got about anger? Was it or not ? Was it safe to express? Were you told never to get angry? Were you told it's dangerous? Was the house violent? I mean, I've had people grow up in violent households and they're , nope, never, because it feels too scary. , that's . What is your relationship? What is your relationship to the experience of anger? , go. . that makes me wonder. It was , I've got a 10 year old and she's already a teenager. she is spicy sometimes. And some days she'll be snarky and rude to me and I'll be , oh my gosh, I have to teach her to be respectful. And then other days. And then at the same time in my thoughts, I'm , , the fact that she can tell me what she actually thinks is a sign that , at least, at least she feels she could speak up in a way. That I never could speak up. I'm torn between this. , do I, I, I, the ideal is I'm going to be teaching her how to disagree respectfully. That's the ideal. She could still tell, but I don't see it as awful that she , sometimes it's really rude to me. I totally get, I totally get that. And it's, it seems both, . It's , you're happy that she's speaking up, but to me, it's the way it's doing it. . . . . . As she gets older, by the way. , there's many great books, but one is about half the stuff our adolescents say to us, it's an exercise in not reacting and not taking seriously because literally their job is to activate us. For a minute, 12 and tips. I do want to hear about , semantically, how does anger show up in your body? , what does it look ? Yes. And also I was going to just say to you, oh . When your daughter is that way, what happens to you? Do you get activated? . I mean, I'm pretty level, but every once in a while, man, she gets me and I'm just , , you do not talk to me that way. Young lady. . . I mean, our kids can just push our buttons no other. And I think often it's , what am I enraged about? And usually it's feeling I can't control something and it's triggering something from earlier that I can't control. But , that's a big, that's a big, the body stuff is important. . And that's the other reason I wanted to talk about this correlation between anxiety is anger. And I don't know if I know you've talked about Besser Vendor Coke. I don't know if you've talked about Peter Levine and the somatic experience. Yes, you have actually. . I love somatic experiencing is kind of my favorite lens to be honest. Oh my gosh. I am. We are twins. I talked to the first weekend of training before COVID and I've done somatic experiencing work. And it's the other proof to me about anxiety. . . I love the anxiety and the anger connection because every time I was anxious, extremely anxious and I couldn't kind of figure it out myself. And I called my somatic experiencing person when we did a session inevitably, and I am dead serious here. It was rage. It was rage. It was getting into my body. Obviously, , they focus and then move to the next spot and all that stuff. And eventually it would end up in my hands. And she'd be , , I'm not going to do this. , what do your hands want to do? Oh, they want to push out. They want to push out. And literally most of my anxiety when it got bad was connected to past boundary violations that I was enraged about and couldn't get angry at the time. I mean, that's I'm saying that really simplistically. But , the somatic experiencing stuff to me, much of the presentation is about that lack of resolved rage, powerlessness, calmness. . Pressure out approach. Yuri's portfolio. Pressure out approach. It's much to see in plata. It's such a logics asked about written. . The film. . mind-boggling it's called the body says no and basically this is a synopsis it's literally about codependency i hate to say it the inability of people to express themselves and all the physiological manifestations of them in diseases he literally talks about in the first three chapters all the fizz i'm not an md but all what happens physiologically to us when we repress and then how it manifests in different illnesses and hearing him recently he literally says when someone said to him what's the most important piece of advice you could ever give and he says say no and to me it's because all of the examples he gives in that book of people's medical problems whether it's headaches stomach aches literal a lot of rheumatoid arthritis and inflammation immune responses and illnesses all connected to people that did extreme caretaking didn't express to caretakers weren't allowed to be who they really are all those themes some kind of codependency he says is really basically what he's saying is you may not be in touch with your body but you are not in touch with your body and you're not in touch with your body and you're not in touch with your body and you're not in touch with your body and you're not in touch with it but your body is saying no it's saying to you now the other person who i really i literally just wrote an article for this pain magazine i'll send it to you it's coming out in a couple weeks about the correlations between codependency and pain physical pain and i quoted a lot of these books and the other guy is this dr john sarno who wrote the mind body connection something that he treated the pain with a lot of pain and he said howard stern all these movie stars back in the day at first it was just all backaches and what his number one cause of backaches are what hey chronic anger interesting yes interesting he swears he's a psychoanalytic guy and he gives all these examples and talks about anxiety about every physical manifestation is caused by the fact that the person who is by this chronic there's a word he has for it but it's basically chronic tension holding chronic tension all different areas of your body and anger is the biggest culprit it's interesting I mean we look at activation nervous system activation when we feel threatened yes we can fight flight or freeze now a lot of times when we talk about anxiety we talk about flight and freeze but we don't talk about the fight aspect of it and how to process that and I would I would say I have not done much work in that area that's why you're here that's what you're here I'm good because if you want to fight or you have the instinct to fight and as a woman it's not something maybe that comes naturally you're gonna want immediately go inward externalize yes and that's gonna look the first you think you really tap into that and that's why some of the somatic work and you talked about exercise and I remember doing a lot of in the early days my husband was a somatic worker and he did a lot of certain yoga poses to get in touch with running your anger and stuff that I mean definitely we have to move it through the body you're absolutely but it's scary Sarah let me tell you let's do this why is it scary to you personally what's your first thought I can think of two examples and I don't even have the words for this I was just I just came from pickleball and someone else came to the gym and is church-sick and I'm oh my god I'm gonna go to church gym and they had it reserved to play soccer and I wanted to play soccer with him and I asked him I joined you guys whatever long story short long story short I was reminded of when I played soccer in college and it was intramural and stuff it was casual soccer recreational soccer and people said Emma you were kind of scary because you were competitive I would kick the ball too hard and I'd hurt people not hurt people one lady she got a red mark on her leg because I kicked the ball too hard and another time I was playing intramural flag football and my friend was you're getting kind of competitive Emma you get a little too little too intense and it's a little scary and I'm then I go back to this repressed place I'm a nice therapist is always peaceful I would say that's a little scary to think of myself as being competitive let's go and I wanted to play soccer with them and as I was driving home I was thinking man I just missed that feeling of being able to be as intense as I can be yes two things one is it sounds it's a great place for you to express that aggressiveness and no I being aggressive I actually enjoy that in soccer but I'm absolutely not aggressive in my relationships except for sometimes when I'm really passive aggressive we didn't get to that one that's what I was gonna it's funny the saying how do you're around a passive aggressive person everybody around them is angry no and growing up I was taught you don't inconvenience people you don't say what you really think because it might hurt their feelings and I think I'm afraid of hurting other people yes and it's great though because on one hand you're saying the sports and the competitiveness was a way you could get that out but on the other hand I wonder that's the safe place to get it out but what's really going on behind all that where did where is the wound yes wound what and I would say as the you're saying to me there's a fear of hurting people's feelings the question is when did you first have the fear what happened first thing let's see I can think of probably I was 13 my sister said you're selfish oh you're such a selfish person and then I remember pouting for a long time was your coping skill we're trying to get attention trying to get her to say sorry or something you're trying to get a need met that you can't get met in another way I would say it started earlier in the 13 I would just guess I mean I remember being very angry at my parents during those middle school years I hated my parents but I never told them that no but what are you angry about if you back it up even earlier Emma oh baby let's go because the fear of what other people think I bet starts way earlier you think about elementary school when did you start did something happen in a class did it happen with a sibling I mean the selfishness thing is definitely a message it's oh I can't be selfish just even wanting what I want is selfish that's big but usually it's earlier I mean I don't I don't remember I don't have any memories I think my mom was someone you did not disagree with you don't disagree with her either you're wrong or you're being mean if you disagree I was not allowed to express opinions without being I mean yes and no she's a good person now we have a good relationship now I'm sure you do look what you just said you said you said oh I have this fear of other people's opinions and later you're I guess I couldn't express figure to my mom because I would never be what would be the consequence of that a kid feeling completely powerlessness lectures just lectured and the only response to that is anger because there's no place in between it's I could feel sad about it I could get anxious but really it sounds it's powerlessness and anger and that could have been part of what was happening I mean the thing that I talk about a lot is the whole fear thing and we could say slash anxiety I mean supposedly there's only two fears we're born with the fear of loud noises and the fear of falling are the physiological fears to me we don't pop out of the womb with fears of rejection versus abandonment fears of not being liked not being loved all these things happen and then this wound happens and then we behave out of those temptations you're saying geez I couldn't even express my opinion to my mother because I was always wrong how did I what did I become I became someone who was always accommodating and acquiescing or I became someone that maybe just felt angry and needed to get it out either possible it's true it's true and it's there wasn't there wasn't space to disagree there wasn't space to have conversations it was just you're probably wrong you get lectured and I couldn't say that to them in my teenage years I couldn't be I don't how you're doing this that would have just never gone over that would but I don't know but you probably felt it a lot more when you got to be a teenager that's you're in the hatred you couldn't repress it when we're little it seems that's easier to do but we put on hormones and we're getting bigger and blah blah now it's going to start coming out and what's fascinating and I know I'm not your therapist but what's fascinating to me now is that you're saying this thing and then we think about the last video we did when you're talking about your mother a lot getting really mad at her because of her dismissiveness and then I think of course because your training and your anger goes way back when you think about it someone dismissing someone saying oh I'm not and taking over and that was the exact same dynamic really when you think about it no it's true and I could I can definitely see my resentment shows up more with my mother-in-law now than with anyone else really but I don't I also have to interact with her at least that are more other I can't avoid I can't just avoid that relationship whereas if anyone else bugs me I can just avoid them basically and my mom is funny with adult kids she's completely heads off she doesn't give advice not hands off she loves being involved in her life sitting up and playing with her grandkids but she doesn't give advice and she doesn't tell us what to do and she doesn't she treats her adult kids very much just lets them make their own choices and have their own path which is which is why I think now when my mother-in-law comes in and tells me what to do I get a little bit huffy that old activation yes good point yes old activation let's say it's old activation what do I do now if it's I really couldn't say what I wanted to say what I wanted to say I'm feeling just what did her mom do last night I was going to say hey 찬έ trainees colaborating or taking external roles of what they looked the older I get older hairs go in pretty bad but that's good to enter I thinkesp an aftertaste but I guess at least I would say the parents are made up when you look at us it's not on the inside that they had need a break and they would have done wolfy is going to do a very funny one move he and daughter talk and go nothing the constant spicesии not to be mailed, but you write an anger letter. And what you start with is you use whatever language you want to use and you just write very specifically and as long as possible, all the things you're angry out and you get the anger out first. Because really what happens is once you start getting to the bottom of the anger, you recognize the sadness and the loss. And what you do is you write the anger letter towards the person and then you say what you're sad about. And then you say, geez, this is what I'd really want in a relationship. . you write an anger letter and you get to the bottom where you really identify the sadness. . The other thing we discussed already, doing your exploration around your beliefs around anger in your family and what is hard for you around expressing it. The other tool that I find is the anger letter. And I find it really helpful because it's a really good tool. And I find it really helpful because it's a really good tool. And I find it really helpful because it's a really helpful as this. And I even do this myself. When I'm feeling either anxious or I can't identify something, I write across and this is going to sound simple, but it works. Writing across the top of a piece of paper, what am I angry about, sad about, or scared about? And you just free write for 10 minutes. And I am telling you, Emma, often when I've done that exercises, I get to what's underneath the underneath. I might feel angry, but I really get to the bottom line process of it, which is really helpful. . , because , because we don't want to just be , , if you're mad, you should just express that anger that. I think that's a very simple approach that leads to , evidence of going to rage rooms just makes people more ragey, ? we find what's underneath. We say, , , maybe what was underneath mine was , oh, I was afraid I wouldn't be listened to, which is , oh, I was afraid I wasn't a good person or wasn't valuable or something that. And I think that's a really good approach. And I think that's a really good then what? . I've got this fear of , oh, I'm not good enough. I'm not powerful enough, whatever. And then what? . then I see, and I have the insight that, oh my God, I remember having this insight about a fear, , all these relationships I had with men, , I was always feeling a victim. And really what I saw is I had this fear from very young about not feeling loved because of my mom was unavailable. And I think what happens is when you recognize the earlier fear that's connected to your present resentment, you have this, this is what happened to me. It opens up this awareness of my gosh, I'm literally operating in the present and projecting on all my relationships, a fear that has nothing to do with Tom, my boyfriend. what I'm saying? you get some spaciousness around the, the anger and it helps to kind of alleviate some of the energy around it where you get, I do think awareness acceptance, , kind of getting some spaciousness. Anger can feel really big. And that's why it's important to look at what is getting activated. getting the awareness, obviously writing can help, but you're actually absolutely . I don't feel you, it's not about getting angry at the people in your life because that is not appropriate. . Feeling anger is . Expressing anger in writing or exercise or soccer or, , calling your best friend and venting, or, , what screaming in your car is a good one, , when you're driving and you're just , you've had it and you're screaming. , yes, definitely getting out the physiological piece is great. But to me, what really reduces and kind of, you get the, , is when you get to the underlying fear and then the, the sadness, because really what was, what was there for me is the wound that I didn't feel loved. What do you do with the wound then? Is this something where you're , , at least now that I've named it and I'm clear about it, it's not going to fuel all this false, superficial anger. That's at least we're going to get rid of all that. , the suffering, ? Pain is inevitable, but suffering is optional. all this extra stuff we add on top of our primary emotion. now we're back to the primary emotion. We're , I feel sad. Or that lady. Now lady who didn't want to have a baby. , oh, I'm actually really scared because I have this human I want to love. And I kind of wish I didn't . these are some serious or , oh, I'm afraid I'm not afraid. I'm not a good enough person. These are big, big emotions, intense emotions. And then it's , now what? Yes. And this is going to sound simple. And I'm sure you talk about this on your channel all the time is owning the emotion, letting it through and not letting it get stuck and watching the cognitions because it's not really the emotion. It's what we make up about the emotion. . , if I feel the wound and I'm in a therapy session and I have some tears, I can move through that and leave and go play pickleball. If I have the wound, but I start telling myself, oh, it's not to feel this way. I shouldn't feel this way. I can't believe I'm. And you make up a drama about, , you just piling up all this stuff on top of a feeling that's pretty unmanageable. But when we just sit with the core feeling, it's actually, we're very capable of having that feeling. And it passes, energy passes it. It's that saying, I know this sounds simple. What we resist persists. . . . . When we resist something, it continues. And it spreads the hurt everywhere. It spreads the hurt to my partner, spreads the hurt to my kids. Yes. Versus , , it's that. Go ahead. Go ahead. I was just going to say, God is in the pause. , God is in the pause or pause, pray and proceed. I mean, really, , pressing that big pause button, I mean, is a tool. I mean, if you're feeling the activation, the thing is, what can I do now to not, , to zip it for now, to be honest, to take care of myself, that, , the other thing is a really good tool is compassion. And I know that. This sounds kind of crazy, but one tool that's really helped me with anger towards others, especially what's happened during COVID and all this stuff is remembering having compassion for that human being and saying they have a history, they have wounds, they have hurts. In fact, they are me and I am them. We're all the same. And when I can get to the compassion and remember that nothing is personal and which is hard for people to get something your mother said, isn't personal, it's really not. It's mom's wounds. , it's her mom. And her mom. Exactly. Yes, exactly. Exactly. That's good stuff. , I only have 10 minutes left because I do have another call after this. What else do you want to make sure people think about, know about or aware of when it comes to processing resentment and anger? I think the most important thing is saying to yourself, it's not going to kill you. anger doesn't kill us. It's what you're doing. It's what we do with the anger that kills us, ? , , shooting dope or, , run up. it's the experience of anger. It's really practicing just working with it and recognizing that having the feeling of anger is . It's you don't need to do anything immediately about it. And I think people have such terror around just experiencing it. that's one thing. And also saying to yourself, and I really believe this. the more comfortable you get with the anger, the less depressed you'll be and the less anxious you'll be. And that is key. That is really, really key. I mean , a lot to say about that. But internalized anger can just affect depression and anxiety. And we're saying with this Gabor Mate's stuff, it affects our bodies and our wellbeing in huge ways. Huge ways. , you probably got the probably got the conspiracy theory. And it really maybe has certain big ways out there or even forms some sort of micro side effects that affect aquela life of your which is how we're cigarettes and alcohol. I mean you're of course . I think you still take drugs. about that. But internalized anger is Maybe internalized anger can just affect depression and anxiety, and we're saying with this Gabor Mate stuff and affects our bodies and our being. In that sense Haha . think that way. that. . And it's interesting to me when we frame resentment as essentially a lack of assertiveness, a lack of ability to say no, it opens up some real options to solve it, which is being assertive and being assertive isn't just telling other people what they have to do or telling other people it's being really clear on what's in your love is control and what's not and allowing it, letting what you can't control go and taking action on what you can change, ? Yes. Clarity is key. And you just said it. The thing with it is there's often angry people or anxious people, it's all externally focused. they're doing this to me. And this goes back to the codependency stuff, , where you start blaming and it's the thing about anger and really mental health recovery is I am responsible. It's got to be about me and owning it. And what can I do about it? Rather than -and- is not going to change. My husband, who I'm resentful at, , I can make requests, but ultimately I need to resolve the resentments. I can't base my happiness on someone else changing or else I'll be happy for a long time. . That's good stuff. I love it. I know. The other tool is, , there's something I call fancy resentments, which is out of the big book of AA, but often our resentments are made up. they're not made up. They're not made up. They're not made up. They're not made up. They're not made up. They're not made up. They're not made up. They're not made up. They're not made up. They're not even based on reality. Be careful about that. I mean, you've had this experience, ? Where say you call someone and they don't call you back away. And the next thing , you're in a rage and you're , I can't believe that. And you get all spiraled in this anger. And then the person calls you, , 15 minutes later and says, oh my God, my dog got out. And you're , no anger. . we create all these imaginary windmills in our brain. I mean, all these imaginary things. That we're fighting that people are mean or unthoughtful. And it's , oh, we actually have no idea what's going on. We have no idea what's going on. And the other really brilliant thing I heard recently from Gapurja, someone actually told me this recently, which I thought was great, is we talk much about fears or anxieties and all that stuff. And he said, is it really the fear of abandonment that's running you or the fear of feelings when you're abandoned? And really, when you think about that, the fears, we do a lot of that. Oh, I have a fear of rejection. I have a fear, , this. Isn't it all just fear of experiencing my own feelings in a certain way? Yes, that's all. , it is. I'm just afraid of feeling sad. I'm just afraid of feeling angry. I'm just afraid of feeling rejected. . Yes. the more comfortable and you talk about this a lot and I say this pausing, setting timers you can check in with yourself on my feeling now, because the other thing is resentment. When you repress, then it can manifest two weeks later and you're screaming at your husband or your wife, , try to check in daily with, geez, did I get upset today? Did I get angry today? Am I harboring a resentment? Do kind of daily check-ins really helps also. . I love it. do you have a writing exercise you'd recommend? Is it just the letter? Send the letter, write the letter, don't send it, get down to the bottom of the letter, find out what's the real sadness and then. . And writing across about, , afraid, angry or sad. And also there's a whole process with resentment that's possible, but it's really looking at, , who am I resentment flat? What are the effects? And then turning it around and saying, geez, what did I want from this person? What are the behaviors I keep doing when I'm mad that don't work? And what do I really need? , the mantra from codependency recovery, what do I want? What do I need? . And looking at that underlying fear that fuels the resentment. If you can identify, that's stuff. It's I say to clients, sometimes it will wrap up with this. , when a client says either, I don't know, or I don't care, , these kind of terms is just , I don't want to really get in touch with what is happening. I don't want to talk about that. I don't want to, , if we talk about that, the cat's out of the bag. , that's . That's . And it's hard to chase that cat down. Yes. Getting comfortable with whatever your emotional landscape is now. That's the key. . And the way to do that is to practice sitting with it. You can do that with mindfulness. You can talk about it. You can write about it. You can pray about it. How do we get comfortable? Just get better at sitting with our feelings. Knowing that they're waves. I mean, they're not going to kill us. They come and go. I mean, how often do you wake up in a certain mood? Half an hour later, you're feeling different. Half an hour later, you're feeling it's really ridiculous in a way to get attached to any of it. That's where the Buddhism stuff comes in. , the non-attachment. And the mindfulness is key because none of it matters. It's just, , what I'm saying? I know what you're saying. . , it has been lovely having you on again, as always. Thank you much for your time. I really appreciate it. All , my friend. Hey, tell everyone where they can find you. . drsaramisho.com, not a huge, , social media person, but I do have a little YouTube channel called Leaving Crazy Town. And we talk about anger and resentment on that channel. And there's a podcast also. those are the places to find me. And I write articles for a magazine called The Sober Curate. Love it. . Lovely to see you as always. Love you. All . Bye, sweetie. Hi there. If you found anything in this video helpful, I would really appreciate it if you could give it a thumbs up or share it with someone who could benefit from it today.