Hey everybody. My name's Dr. Scott Giacomucci. I'm the director and founder of the Phoenix Center for Experiential Trauma Therapy and Media, Pennsylvania. Today, I wanted to highlight the American Psychological Association's new guidelines for treating complex PTSD and complex trauma. I was really excited to see that these guidelines were created and posted just a couple of months ago at this point in August, 2024, and that they really validate and emphasize that the treatment and recovery of complex trauma and complex PTSD is uniquely different than the treatment and recovery for regular PTSD. if you're a professional that works with complex trauma, these new APA guidelines are really important. They're not just a must know. They finally reflect the complexity of what many of our clients have lived through and are experiencing related to complex post-traumatic stress disorder. these guidelines were created by one of APA's divisions, along with the International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation. And these are professional practice guidelines. They're not just, it's not just a publication explaining a diagnosis, but helping us better understand. What complex trauma is. But these are actually guidelines to guide us in best practices for treating complex trauma and complex PTSD in and across the entire treatment continuum, every level of care and across all treatment modalities. with these best practice standards for complex PTSD and complex trauma, the goal is really to move beyond checklists of symptoms or symptom reduction towards a more contextual, relational, and person-centered care. in talking about guidelines for complex PTSD and complex trauma, we first need to consider the differences. PTSD involves four main symptom clusters, which I cover in detail in other videos. But as a quick refresher, we've got the intrusions and re-experiencing the nightmares and the flashbacks. We've got the arousal and reactivity, the hypervigilance, the hyperarousal, the difficulty concentrating, the irritability. We've got avoidance and numbing, dissociation. We've got negative beliefs and negative moods, distorted beliefs about ourselves, about others, and feeling we're stuck in one emotion all the time. these are the four symptom clusters of PTSD. On top of that, we've got three symptom clusters for complex PTSD, and these are a difficulty with emotional regulation, feeling overwhelmed or emotionally shut down, difficulty with relationships, really feeling we want to be close to people, but we don't feel safe in relationships. We feel distant from others. And a negative self-concept, feeling who we are is a failure or worthless. these are the three add-on symptom clusters for complex PTSD. And these best practice guidelines really orient around these three add-on symptom clusters for CPTSD in that, I talk about in another video. These three add-on symptom clusters can really interfere with one's ability to engage in traditional treatment and especially traditional trauma treatments because they make it hard for clients to be in a therapeutic relationship or be in a group setting. They make it harder for an individual to manage their emotions when talking about trauma, and they make it harder for an individual to make sense of their experience when they have a really distorted negative self-concept. And these are the three add-on symptoms for CPTSD. complex trauma is different than other types of trauma in that it's complex. It's chronic. It's repeated. It happens again and again and again and again. It's often interpersonal or relational. And many times the trauma is intentional. Complex trauma often happens at the hands of another adult, a human that intentionally engages in violence or manipulation or abuse. Whereas many other types of trauma are actually intentional. a natural disaster or a car crash. These things are accidents. And there's a different way we experience harm when it's accidental than when it's at the hands of someone that was intentionally trying to hurt us. Especially when that person is someone who was a family member or a caregiver whose job inherently was to nurture and protect us. Complex trauma is also different than other types of trauma in the timing of it, in that it's developmentally. It happens early on in our lives most of the time. And it often can be transgenerational or systemic in that it's trauma that gets passed down from generation to generation. That it's built within the system of a family or within larger systems of oppression. complex trauma is uniquely different than other types of trauma in these specific ways. And complex PTSD, which results from complex trauma, is often missed or misdiagnosed at the end of the day. And it's often seen as other things borderline personality disorder or depression or anxiety or other personality disorders or mood disorders or ADHD. Or sometimes it's just labeled as treatment resistant. That it's something fundamentally flawed with the client. these new APA guidelines for CPTSD treatment are particularly important. And it's important that as professionals that we understand them, that we really owe it to our clients. To be aware of these new guidelines. To stay up to date as best practices change. these new treatment guidelines are based mostly on, are based on complex trauma rather than the old treatment guidelines for PTSD, which are based more on single incident trauma and manualized treatments for trauma. the new guidelines that I'm going to go through, the seven different areas, they really embrace a developmental and relational approach to trauma. Really highlights the socio-cultural and systemic influences on trauma. And also on the treatment process. And these new guidelines address the full spectrum of outcomes. Rather than just focusing on symptom reduction as the outcome, these new guidelines focus on the fragmentation of identity and dissociation and chronic shame and relationships and attachment disruptions and emotional regulation, in addition to the reduction of symptoms. it's a much more, not just a more holistic approach or more holistic way of understanding trauma, but also a more holistic way of understanding what it means for a treatment to be effective. this is a big shift from what's your diagnosis or what's wrong with you. And instead of focus on what happened to you and how it's shaped your sense of self, your sense of safety and your sense of connection in the world. these seven APA guidelines for treating complex trauma and complex PTSD are broken up into an acronym history. And it stands for a humanistic, integrative, sequential, temporal, meaning that it's looking at throughout the whole lifespan, outcomes focus, relational, and the why is why. Why did this happen? Why me? this is the acronym APA created for understanding the trauma. And it's a really good way to understand trauma. And it's a really good way to understand the trauma. And it's a really good way to understand the trauma. And it's a really good way to understand the trauma. And this is where we end up defining the seven APA guidelines. And these are the seven guidelines. I'm going to go through them one at a time here. The first is humanistic, and this means that we've got to really approach clients with a sense of dignity and respect, a sense of compassion, a sense of, treating the whole person. That trauma often involves de-humanization, leaves people feeling less human, stigmatized. And that our treatment approaches must be humanistic. They must be more humanizing. They must be empathetic and co-located. Let me have that for the client. compassionate, that we've got to counter that sense of dehumanization that our clients are left with after complex trauma. humanistic approaches emphasize agency and collaboration and choice and empowerment and strengths. This means really validating the survival responses our clients have used, affirming their identities and working together, collaborating, co-creating treatment goals. in this first treatment guideline for complex PTSD, we see a lot of the same key words that came from SAMHSA's trauma-informed care standards, which are covered in other videos on this channel. The second guideline for complex PTSD treatment is that it's got to be integrative, that there's no single modality or treatment that works for everyone, that we've got to recognize there's multiple pathways to healing from trauma and especially the healing from complex trauma. This means as mental health professionals that we've got to integrate multiple approaches together, that we can't just rely on talk therapy, or we can't just rely on cognitive behavioral therapy. We can't just rely on IFS or EMDR, but we've got to be trained in multiple modalities, or we've got to put together a treatment team for each client that they can experience multiple approaches to healing from trauma. This involves including the expressive arts therapies and body-oriented approaches, and spiritual and existential frameworks beyond just cognitive approaches. That we need to engage in both top-down approaches, which are the more cognitive approaches that work from the top of the brain down to try to change behavior in the body, and also the bottom-up approaches, which are the body-oriented approaches, where we work with sensations and posture and body language and nonverbal communication. We work with how the trauma lives in the body in order to impact other parts of the body. we've got to combine memory processing with skills building and meaning making. Our approaches have got to be integrative rather than over-relying on just cognitive approaches, or over-relying on just body-oriented approaches. The third key guideline for treating complex PTSD and complex trauma is that treatment's got to be sequential. This means that we've got to work from a three-phase approach to treating trauma. And particularly, we've got to work from a three-phase approach to treating trauma. Pretty much all the treatments for trauma, complex trauma, articulate this in different language. That phase one is about safety, it's about stabilization, it's about coping skills and relationship forming. Phase two is about trauma processing, dealing with the rage and the anger and the defenses and the grief and the shame and the fear and the terror. And phase three is about integration, about meaning making, about transformation and post-traumatic growth, about reconnection. And these three are the three key guidelines for treating trauma. And phase three is about integration, about meaning making, about transformation and post-traumatic growth, about reconnection. And these three are the three key guidelines for treating trauma. And phase three is about integration, about meaning zipting together happiness, consent and rein Sergey. , these three phases help us create a sense of readiness before we get into trauma processing. , these three phases help us create a sense of readiness before we get into trauma processing. That we don't just dive into telling trauma stories on processes, or reprocessing traumatic memories that first , these three phases help us create a sense of readiness before we get into trauma processing. tell you probably had your trauma processing very interesting, or something that's interesting. We've got to slash that way, go in different directions that we've got to get to the cinematography and see if the pain is surprising you for it. And then she comes to think, , you're gonna replace me for that they're watching you over and over. The fourth guideline for treating CPTSD and complex trauma is that the treatment's got to be temporal, meaning that we've got to consider the timing of the trauma, that it occurred early on in the lifespan or maybe throughout the entire lifespan. And that when someone experiences developmental trauma, it really disrupts their sense of attachment, their ability to feel safe in relationships, their inner working model for relationships, their sense of emotional regulation or shutdown and numbness, and their sense, their core sense of identity, who they experience themselves to be or how they see themselves or feel about themselves. this means that we've really got to move beyond just treating trauma as if it were a single experience and move into treating the whole person and the culmination of all of their experiences throughout their life, throughout their timeline. And that's what we're going to be doing. And this goes even beyond just the client's timeline, but across generations, that complex trauma is often generational in that it can get passed down from generation to generation and that the experiences of complex trauma, not only are they transgenerational, but they're also systemic in that historical traumas get passed down from generation to generation and have a real impact on the clients that we're working with. this could include. And we've got to be very clear about this. And this could include the trauma of slavery or the historical trauma of gender discrimination or the historical trauma involved in many of our ancestors' immigration experiences or genocide, war, famines, discrimination, all these different types of historical and ancestral traumas. Although they may have happened decades ago and centuries ago, they still can have a real impact on the clients that we're working with. we've got to take this into consideration. Now the fifth key guideline for treating complex PTSD and complex trauma is that it's got to be outcomes focused. And in this guideline, APA really argues that we've got to go beyond just looking at symptom reduction as the primary outcome, that we've got to look at co-occurring disorders, mood disorders, addictions, eating disorders, somatic symptoms, suicidality, that when we're working with complex trauma, we're going to be focusing on the outcomes. And that's really what I'm focused on. If we're talking about a trauma, we're usually working with an individual that's been diagnosed with multiple diagnoses, and that we've got to go beyond even just treating these diagnoses. We've got to help promote a sense of increased overall functioning, a sense of self-worth and self-efficacy, a restored connection with relationships and community and self, and help a client develop a new sense of meaning, help them make sense of their experience. treatment for CPTSD has got to be more holistic, that we're not just treating for a single memory or traumatic experience, but that we're treating the whole person. The sixth area of the six guideline APA articulates for treating CPTSD and complex trauma is that it's got to be relational, that the therapeutic relationship is often the core avenue that healing is experienced when it comes to trauma therapy, that many trauma survivors never had a safe or attuned relationship in their life, someone that protected them or nurtured them or cared about them without taking advantage of them. And the therapeutic relationship has got to be really core to our treatment for complex trauma and relational trauma, that therapy is a chance for clients to rebuild a sense of trust, to repair any relational ruptures, to model healthy boundaries and vulnerability and safety, and connection. This means that as therapists, we've got to be really careful about trauma reenactments in the therapeutic relationship and the presence of transference and counter transference. We've got to really handle these with care and with ethical clarity. And this really highlights the importance of group therapy, I would argue, that relationships can be even more centered in a group therapy approach than in individual therapy. And the seventh key guideline for treating CPTSD is that it's a challenge for the therapist to be able to handle the trauma reenactment. And the key guideline for treating complex trauma and complex PTSD outlined by APA is the why. Why did the trauma happen? Why me? Why did nobody help? it's really exploring all of the whys, exploring meaning making and the questions, the confusion, the more existential experience that accompanies trauma and accompanies PTSD, helping clients reframe a sense of self-blame for maybe transforming it into a sense of accountability. And I think that's a really important piece of the book is really understanding that the trauma is a result of the client's responsibility for the perpetrator and the client's accountability for the perpetrator or renegotiating their sense of moral injury into a sense of moral repair or, or strong sense of moral character or moral values, or transforming a sense of hopelessness or helplessness into a sense of empowerment or autonomy, essentially helping the client transform posttraumatic stress into post-traumatic growth. That within our treatment approaches for trauma, there's gotta be a space for exploring the spiritual and emotional parts of the trauma that we're dealing with and the emotional the spiritual and existential domains of experience. those are the seven key guidelines APA articulates for treating complex trauma and complex PTSD in their new guidelines that were published at the end of 2024. Now, there's some additional considerations that are outlined in the guidelines, one of which is about equity and inclusion. And APA highlights that trauma really intersects with race and gender and class and disability and other forms of systemic oppression, and that many experiences of racism or oppression or discrimination are experiences of complex trauma. That just reoccurring experiences of abuse is complex trauma, reoccurring experiences of racism or discrimination is also complex trauma. And we've got to take this into consideration throughout our treatment. Now, we also have to be really thoughtful about self-care. As a therapist working with complex trauma and complex PTSD, we're more prone to experiencing vicarious trauma. And this means for anyone working with complex trauma, that supervision, peer support, training, self-care become that much more important. And a third consideration outlined by APA is the importance of training. That just because we get a master's degree or a license to provide therapy doesn't mean that we're not going to be able to do it. , I think that's a really important point. That just because we get a master's degree or a license to provide therapy doesn't mean that we're equipped to competently, ethically, and safely treat trauma and complex PTSD. That treating C-PTSD really requires specialized training and specialized approaches to trauma and dissociation and moral injury. And that it's important that we engage in thorough training and ongoing training. , these are the cliff notes, the key aspects of the new treatment guidelines for treating C-PTSD. treating complex PTSD and complex trauma. These guidelines are essentially a call to treat the entire person, not just treat the diagnosis or the symptoms. I really encourage clinicians to read the full document, which I can put a link to in the video description here, and to reflect on your own practice to continue engaging in supervision and in training. And let's create some discussion about this. I want to encourage you to write in the comments, which of these seven aspects of the guidelines that the acronym history, which of these seven ones speaks to you the most, which one do you feel has been the most important for yourself or the most important for the clients that you work with, or which one of these seven guidelines do you feel has been most lacking in your experience in the mental health treatment industry? And because if you've read it , otherwise, you seem to be having an unacceptable read in your mind. you want to make sure that you do not just fill in one of the guidelines, say you had a handshake, , a little kick.