Narcissistic personality disorder is a stable, persistent pattern of personality functioning that is characterized by selfishness and arrogance. And there's nine symptoms of which a person needs five. And I'm going to crunch these down. What are some of the key traits that drive high performance are also the ones at the very core of narcissism? If you were in a stadium, what percentage of people are narcissists? 15 to 16 percent. And if you were to walk into the halls of a world-class football team or world-class basketball, coaches slash athlete mix? 20 to 25 percent. Wow. Welcome back or welcome to the Finding Mastery podcast, where we dive into the minds of the world's greatest thinkers and doers. I am your host, Dr. Michael Gervais, by trade and training, a high performance psychologist. Now, the idea behind these conversations is simple, to sit with the extraordinaries, to really learn about how they work from the inside out. Today's conversation is one that hits deep, and I am pleased to welcome Dr. Ramani Dravosula, clinical psychologist, professor, and leading expert on narcissism. when a person is in a relationship with someone who's narcissistic, the most common experiences we witness are self-blame, self-doubt, isolation, anxiety, depression. I hate to say it, but destroying a person's psyche is a pretty straightforward process. Dr. Ramani shares her model for navigating these relationships. She explains the different types of narcissism and how gender shapes their expression. The girls are allowed to be able to express emotions. What we still have not figured out is how to hold space for men and boys to be vulnerable without pathologizing them as weak. And without that vent, I do think that the grandiose and the malignant narcissism are more likely than to be expressed. Dr. Ramani's insights are powerful, practical. They're grounded in years of clinical research and personal experience too. , speak to the person that's in a relationship with somebody who's narcissistic. How do you help guide them? Stay or go? the stay or go conversation, I tend to be agnostic. I say. With that, let's jump into this week's conversation with Dr. Ramani Jervasula. I'm really looking forward to this conversation. I think I spend a lot of time with narcissists. And . Given what you do, , you do. , . , you do. I. , there's a lot to unpack here. But let's start at the beginning. Where does the story of narcissism begin for you? It begins. It's. I wish it was more sparkly. It's a story more interesting, . But it's actually kind of. many research stories, it becomes sort of a dull necessity as a mother kind of a thing. I was a brand new professor at Cal State LA. And working on other people's research. And there were labs around the city. And the student research assistants would come back. And over a series of weeks, they would just come back, , , really with the sort of , , rubbing the temples. And I was , what's going on? And they kept describing these patients who pretty much monopolized the run of the clinic. They were entitled. They were rude to the receptionist. They were rude to the nurses. They were rude to the research assistants. They were demanding. They were difficult, difficult people. Now, what's the word that came to mind? It was difficult. It was enough that these research assistants were feeling , oh, I don't want to do this anymore. Which made me wonder, would the other health professionals want to step back? And honestly, how much of a sort of. Healthcare toll these people were taking? Was everyone getting poorer care because the healthcare professionals were burned out at dealing with this small handful of difficult patients? That led me to start a program of research looking at personality and health. Health behaviors, perceptions of health, self-protection and health. And with a real focus on these sort of rigid, maladaptive personality styles narcissism to see what would come out of it. And I looked at personality, personality disorders. And I looked at the whole nine yards. But simultaneous to that, I also, about maybe five years later, my private practice was really coming up in earnest. I was doing all this research on narcissism. And I was talking to people who kind of kept telling me the same relationship story. They were being invalidated. They always wondered what they were doing wrong, saying wrong. They were being gaslighted, but we weren't even using the term as much then. And. Sorry, it was a new term for me 10 years ago. . It wasn't part of my training. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. It wasn't? You don't the term. No. We do the term. I think it's probably overused, maybe dangerously, in some cases, but , , we'll come back to a gaslighting what it is. And we also need to operationalize narcissism in a minute. But , , sorry to interrupt, but go, helping in doing my clinical practice. I was , how interesting these people, they bought all the relationship books and all the marriage books, and they did what those books told them chapter in verse, and partners to me, I'm , this is clearly someone narcissistic, the behaviors are there. I decided to take a leap into the unknown and educate these, these clients about narcissism. That was the aha moment, they said, Wait a minute, this thing has a name. And the minute they realized it had a name, and it was a thing, they really kind of came back from the precipice of feeling crazy. And when they when it really was why they were stuck, why they couldn't get unstuck, why the world saw this person one way, and they were having a different experience. Once we were able to reconcile all of that, people were in a much better position to make decisions. I mean, not everyone left. But even those who stayed were , Now I know what I'm dealing with. And the ones who left really left on the on the basis of this really isn't going to change. Because it's not narcissists don't really change. , don't change. And that's how but that's and then I realized what we do is we blame people in these relationships. Why don't you leave? Why don't you leave? Why don't you say what is wrong with you? And you're not being locked in. And the problem was, and this is what was compelling to me, narcissism is different than addiction. Or if you were to partner with bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, those are viewed as problem states, ? Being an addict is not healthy being living with a major mental illness is not healthy. But narcissism is different. These people were charming, charismatic, confident, they look good on paper, they were over represented in leadership. to the world, these people were the proverbial catch. They were often quite charming in a crowd, they'd often pick up the check for a large group of people. the world had a really beneficent view of these folks, while their partners and family members were suffering that dichotomy. That's what brought me into the world, I realized that we have been gaslighting these clients all along. And that's why I came into it. this didn't you said sparkly, your origin story was not sparkly. you did not have a relationship with a narcissistic parent or I know you. It's not your mother, ? Because , it's not my mother. But I'll tell you this, I've had all of the above parent, past partners, not my ex husband, bless his heart. He's good man. But parent, ex, ex partners, friends, colleagues, I had every kind you could have in your life in my life. But here's the irony that click together. Didn't even I'm doing this work doing this work. And I remember my therapist once sort of sitting in front of me in a bemused way. And I was , what is happening with your face? , it's therapist on therapist therapy is a bit , chess with the devil kind of thing. , what is this face? And she said, I moves the day I was , isn't it ironic, , that I basically, , ended up taking over the family business. Not intending to. And she started laughing. She's , I was wondering how long this is gonna take you. And she said, I'm convinced you stayed in those toxic relationships longer than you needed to just to get data. Oh, God. . Let's hope not. But I get it. . let's go. Let's get into. Let's operationalize narcissism a bit. Let's get into , what it is. And we're going to point to the relationship bit of with a narcissist. just go as high level as you want to talk about narcissism, the type the definition, the characteristics and the types. narcissism is a person is a description of a personality style. And I really am making a fine point of that, because I don't think that when we use the word narcissism, we're talking about a disorder, that whole idea of narcissistic personality disorder, we can put a pin on in that and come back to it later. But when I are breaking form from the field, when you say breaking form from the field, and I don't think this diagnosis should have ever existed. It there's no value add, there's no evidence base of treatment. It is no clinician in the mind would write this down. Certainly, it could be a guiding hypothesis, but no one's going to put this on a document that's going to track this client around insurance isn't going to pay. Wait, you're saying that clinicians don't diagnose narcissism, because they don't pay and they don't they don't pay, they don't change. And it's a stigma many times for the client, HIPAA being HIPAA, the fact of the matter is, if this paperwork wins its way through a system, which it may, if somebody's seeing therapy, seeking out therapy, and an institutional system, , an HMO or something that, it is it is a it's sort of the scarlet letter of diagnosis that and borderline personality. And, and I think even narcissistic personality disorder even more, because we actually do have an evidence base for treatment for borderline personality disorder, not narcissism, but not narcissistic personality disorder. And there's not a single clinical trial. . There's some research around it that is compelling and interesting, but not a clinical trial. All , let's get into it. , let's do the let's do let's define it, let's define it. narcissism as a personality style, is a maladaptive and rigid personality style, contrasting it to other healthier styles. That is very much antagonistic in its nature. stuff manipulativeness and hostility, and arrogance and, and selfishness are a big part of the profile. Here's the point I want to make about narcissism, I'm going to list out about five or six key traits and patterns, you got to have all of them. This isn't a pick and choose. It's an all in. you're talking about wait, and in , before you go, . I also want the listener to listen, listen to the words you're using to describe these maladaptive, stable, pervasive characteristics. But then also we're going to you and I are going to come back to the spectrum of it. , because many of these characteristics are very facilitative. Yes, they are high. Performance, you better believe it. . . , , our audience. They're badasses. . And they're gonna listen and go, Oh, my gosh, you just described me. , on a spectrum. . Now, do the actual clinical diagnosis bit that we can hear the exact framing. But I do want people to listen to the other part of this as . , this more subtle character. you want to know what the diagnosis of narcissistic personality disorder, ? it is a stable, persistent pattern. And it's a pattern of personality functioning, that is characterized by patterns, including selfishness and arrogance. And there's nine symptoms of which a person needs five. And I'm going to crunch these down, I'm not going to belabor the nine. But the high points of these nine are things grandiosity, as evidenced by things arrogance, and entitlement, and living in a fantasy world, fantasies of a perfect love story, perfect life, fantasies of a grand business plan being actualized. There is also there, I'm gonna do the shadow there, the spectrum, which is , wait, I can do something special. And yes, I can. I, I think I'm the magical one that can make this happen. That's . , this whole thing runs through me, I am going to make something special. I'm going to change the world. . And it's those wild ones. , the Apple commercial, the crazies. , it's those wild ones that do change the world. They do. And it is those wild ones that change an industry or change a family narrative. And you don't have to be sick to be able to make a radical change. No, , but when we talk about , be really confident, see a bold vision, you're gonna you're hitting on some of these characters, characteristics, keep going. I'm glad you said that. , we'll come back to that to selfishness, and egocentricity, and entire self focus with little regard for the needs and wants of other people. And the needs of the self are put ahead of the needs of all other people around them. And this is where for me that this is the distinguishing characteristic that makes it really toxic. It that I am more important than you. Yes. . Yes. And not only am I more important than you, your needs don't matter. And how about this? I use I to think about it this way, which is, I have a hard time telling the difference between you and me. You're an extension of me, aren't you? , if you're the narcissist, and I'm wearing a blue sweater. And what Mike, why do you wear blue sweaters? I've told him I've told you, ? You don't look good in blue sweaters. But actually, you don't know how I look in it. You just don't blue sweaters. Or your blue sweater doesn't work with my purple shirt. That's really what it is. , there you go. . The next thing is empathy deficits. And here's where I will know that I'm going to do better than the DSM, the diagnostic and statistical manual on this. The DSM kind of takes I think the lazy way on just says it's a lack of empathy. But it's not a lack of empathy. I think that's the simple way out. It is low empathy, cognitive empathy, performative empathy, and transactional empathy. That's narcissism. And by that, I mean, it's variable empathy to that's key. Narcissist. , this is crucial. , because narcissists are people, this is stuff I've expanded on from everybody else's. Oh, very cool. Especially the transactional variable. It's a transactional performative piece. , because here's the thing. Narcissistic people are not devoid of empathy, they cannot be or they would never be as successful as they are, they have to be able to read the room. And to be able to read the room, they have to be aware of the room. . it's, it's in some ways, it's some of the emotional intelligence we see that drive sales, but it's something different than that. When the narcissistic person feels safe, stable, valued and important. They're actually quite empathic. They're good. In essence, the day they get the raise, the day they get the funding, the day they get whatever it is that they want just temporary, it's temporary. this is how you can see how this will confuse a partner. Because on the day the good stuff comes, they wrap their arms around the partner and swing around the kitchen. Baby, let's go to Hawaii. Baby, I'm lucky to have you my god, the house looks amazing. You look amazing. That reads as empathy. It's not. It's a bit of a grandiose fairy tale for a minute. It feels a person's being seen or heard. And the wife might even say, Oh, I'm happy. Gosh, I had a tough day at work. You did baby tell me about your tough day at work. But if she said the same exact thing the next day, when there was a glitch in the funding, she would hear, Are you kidding me? Are you kidding me that I need to hear about your problems? You this house? , that's coming because we get all this money. I do not care what's happening at your little volunteer job. that could happen in one day. Because if the person is a very optimistic person is supplied, then they look empathic. But they also have the capacity to understand how someone feels. I always say it's classically what I say call it crying at the movie. They can watch a movie and they're crying at a scene that's evocative or sad, ? They're not cold. They're not psychopathically cut off from that scene. They're crying. It's a sad scene. It might even be that the dog comes home to its owner. there is a they get emotion, I understand why that would be hard for you. But it's not that emotional kind of hug around a person or doing what they need. It's a very intellectualized experience. narcissistic people also are very socially perceptive. That also falls into this empathy world because they're able to read what people need. And they know, empathy reads to the world. in public, they will be quite performatively empathic, , oh my gosh, , see what a hard time they're going through. And it'll all seem Oh, isn't that also many fields there? And it's transactional. They'll show empathy and say, , we talked about your feelings. Aren't we good? Now let's flip the script. I've done my little empathy currency for the day. That's the picture of empathy. And because it's not an absence of it. A lot of people will say, , they actually did ask me how I felt. And they did listen to the answer. Doesn't that qualify? That's why you're separating lack of empathy with low empathy. Correct. empathy, performative empathy, transactional empathy, manipulative empathy. empathy is the ability to experience another person's state, and to be aware of how your behaviors impact another person, and to be able to create a mental model of what someone else is going through in real time. . And then, just to be clear, compassion would be taking action from that state. you're I've always thought that narcissists were manipulative in the way that they used an empathetic binding moment or bonding moment, but they didn't actually feel it. They don't feel it. But we're saying they get it. It's it is manipulative. , I just wanna make sure I was getting the thing. it's not. But you're saying lack of you're saying it's not lack of , they have, they have cognitive empathy. They've got it. That's empathy. Oh, I see what you're doing. , you're . A lack of empathy is what we see in someone psychopathic. , they don't feel nothing. They don't understand it. It's cold. There's no feeling of anything. . . Finding Mastery is brought to you by Mack Weldon. If you've been a community member here at Finding Mastery for a while, our position on confidence. It's built from the inside out. It's not about flash. It's about really knowing who you are, and showing up with clarity and conviction, a sense of purpose with substance. And that's why I'm excited about what Mack Weldon has to say about this. And I'm sure you're excited to hear what Mack Weldon is doing. They make clothes for men who live that same philosophy. It's understated. It's sharp. It's grounded in quality pieces that do not scream for attention. More they quietly say, I've got this. now I'm wearing their Latitude Bomber. It's clean, it's simple, travels really . And whether I'm heading to work with an organization or just grabbing dinner, it's great. And their silver and denim jeans, it's an elevated fit. It's got great fabric and somehow they feel better. They feel they're feeling a little more comfortable doing it. I would definitely recommend this to you. If you're just getting started, go ahead and check it out. You'll find a lot more. Mack Weldon believes, quote, knowing is more important than showing. And that really resonates here with what we're doing at Finding Mastery, working from the inside out. And if that aligns with how you want to move through the world, I'd encourage you to go check them out. Head to Mack Weldon dot com and use the code Finding Mastery for 20 off your first order of 100 or more. Again, use the code finding mastery at macweldon.com for 20 off your first order of 100 or more. how would somebody that is, when they read your work, they want to be a good person. They want to be their very best. They've been told by their parents, be special. You are amazing. Be confident. Dream big. They're told by their supervisors, , keep going. You're amazing. You can do something. , this whole thing is going to ride or die on your success. you've got it. You're the one. And they're listening and they go, oh, hold on. , I don't know if I really have empathy. , I kind of feel things, but I'm not sure. I'm kind of muted. How would you help somebody distinguish between those two? Let me give you an example. , let's think of it as a person's being told you can do the special things and you've got the special skill set. Go do be succeed. . And the person says, I really want to be a good person. I really want to do this. And this is going to be 12 hour days, seven days a week for the next two years. And it would be really unkind to get into a relationship with someone because I'm not going to have the time for them. And I really want to give all of myself to this. this isn't the time to get into a relationship with someone because that's not cool. That's empathy. Wow. The person who still goes ahead and gets into the relationship because they want to get, they want to have sex or they have status or whatever. And then they're mad at the person because they promised them for the next two years. And they're mad at them falsely. we're in a relationship, but they're never around, or how dare you interrupt my work or my work is more important to you or they just have contempt for that person because they are an object. That's that lack of empathy. But your specialness model holds . The special person is , , this, this thing matters. This thing I'm doing matters to me. And I also don't want to hurt someone. And it's not fair for me to drag someone into this now. let me pull on this one more time, the grandiosity, the specialness, , low on empathy, wants it all. , I want it all. Meaning the relationship, I want a relationship, I can do it all. , , then it's not a lack of empathy. There's a low empathetic, low piece to it. But I think I can do this. I really do think I can do the seven days at 80 hours a week and be a great parent. But lack of self awareness. Yes, that's a lack of self awareness and lack of self awareness. I still file that half in the empathy drawer, and half in this drawer called mentalization. it's the inability to understand that your 80 hours your whole fantasy thing is just not gonna, you're not even stopping to think about how you being out of the house 80 hours a week could affect another person. This is most 24 year olds. Then 20. , not saying most, but it is. I agree with you. . And the frontal lobes don't fully develop till 25. . And I think about the very special talent in elite sport at the age of 19. ? Or the age of 14, where adults start to think of them differently. that's the thing that we don't talk about in elite sport, is they're usually special at a young age. They are. And it's say 14, let's just say, where teachers, adults, uncles, cousins, people that are much older than them start to treat them differently. They treat them they bend at their knee almost. It's a very contorting psychological process to become an elite athlete when you've got your whole community propping you and being deference in a position of deference to you. Let me push back on that, though, because I've worked with more than a few elite athletes in my practice over the years, some narcissistic, some not. . The dividing line. It's funny that you just said some. It's not all or none. No, no, no. Some were , woo. And some really peaked. I mean, world class peaked as young, young people. And then there was this whole, the remaining 70, 80 years are going to have to live after that, ? . The ones who turned into very, very, very, very, very, very, very empathic, compassionate, attuned, connected, adults. They had this core empathy was there all along. And they had all the things you're talking about. The adults were in bended knee and all of that. It was just muted. It was muted. But not even that muted. They just had to, in some cases, what they said, and this is where it gets really interesting and quite complicated. They said that there was no, no margin for error i had to sink the shot i had to win the medal i had to win the prize because i was pretty convinced this parent would stop loving me that's survival i hear that a lot that's survival what i'm saying because in a 12 year old or 15 year old that you're still there's still a little kid brain in there many of us especially them adopt this i don't know adult strategy at the eight with a brain of a 14 year old 16 year old which is amazing at one at one level but then really problematic when they're older hold on we're down i want to ask you a question though i'm going to i want to pivot to i'm really curious about this and i want to make sure we get to the five i want to get to the five but i want to ask you this before i forget how much do you think though in an elite athlete this capacity to train an adult and yet still be expected to have academic responsibilities but that single-minded focus that would be required whether it's in kids who go on to professional athletes athletics or world championships or olympics or all of that how much of do you think is dissociative never been asked that question i've never had the thought it's my biggest concern having worked with this population that some of this felt the dissociation we see in complex trauma an absolute dissociation where they are in this other zone because to feel what has become a transaction with their parent is painful that to go fully into this other space that happened to be spun into this performance but at the end of the day it was dissociation the idea that they put on a new personality not a new personality i'm talking about lower not the not the not the fully fragmented identity dissociation but i'm saying lower on the spectrum of dissociation not quite us kind of someone saying you're there you're there kind of thing but the ability to again we know that people who are workaholics that is a very clearly a form of dissociation that you could go all into something that is relatively unemotional and that does become an offset to earlier traumatic injury disassociative identity disorder is not what you're talking about i'm not talking about that you are talking about a trauma response i'm talking about trauma response exactly something that was happening not being seen not being valued or some sort of trauma and oftentimes we'll we will hear people say you kidding the court was my only safe place yes that's why i got good and i wouldn't necessarily go to dissociation or dissociative experience but i would say a trauma response yes and then i would say this is going to be a little bit of a horseshoe number let's say better than 80 and i think i'm being generous that come from some of the professional students if i'm being performing non-hwareshpion western world cultural events i'm being experimental with my passion life as to speak the instance of cookies it's a very fascinating scene it's aerial and social because we're r Bennington is an android easily pnik because he is a Bahnari john how did he do what his 2002kasili Hoff goes back in time he can't play Bohemian rhne no sule richard who is a real painter pod Time Doctor hood also very similar in his her bi n wasn't the same was or traumatic home, and it also provides a great place to be seen. it's the snake that eats its tail type of experience. I don't think it raises to the level writ large for disassociation, but it is a radical coping mechanism. And I am on record saying that if you knew what I knew about the path to high performance, you would not challenge and push your kids. You would support them. Correct. That's . You would see them and you would be part of their experience, but you would not be pushing them in this kind of wild way because the washout is radical. There's this thing called identity foreclosure. Interesting. And at a young age, I'm trying to figure out, am I rock and roll? Am I jazz? Am I country? , who am I? And if you foreclose too early on just one genre of music, just one way of thinking about yourself, you foreclose on all the other potentialities. Yes. And why would we do that? Because of all of the benefits that the person is making at an uninformed young age. I the conversation about dissociative. I'm going to need to run that through my Tumblr a little bit more because you are absolutely correct that trauma is part of the ecosystem for many, not all. Not all. No, I agree. . And just because you have trauma doesn't mean that it's a dissociative component. No, no. But there's fragmentation in trauma. I mean, the two go hand in hand, ? Yes. Open that up for someone that doesn't. Basically, that the true. The true self that is a is a core element of the human experience is a true us with the preferences, values, beliefs, ways we go through the world, , and spiritually, cognitively, emotionally, that true self exists. . And in the best telling of the story, as a person goes through the development of self childhood into adolescence, in adulthood, the true self gets to emerge. . Good luck with doing that. And in the best telling of the story, as a person goes through the development of self childhood into adolescence, the true self is a true self. And that's what we're going to be talking about in 2025. And actually, at any point in human history, because what ends up happening is now we can have what I'd call not quite full on fragmentation, but definitely fault lines enough that could definitely push the snap, which is even a parent who's , Oh, come on, kids, your old man's an accountant. why don't you be an accountant kind of thing. But there's not the sense that if you became something else, you were going to be rejected. . The parent who wants the kid to play football and, , is putting the games on. I mean, get these three years old, get some of the whole thing, the pads and the helmet and the football and, and then around the age of 14, the kid is much more interested in playing the trombone in the band and doesn't want to play football knows that the parents being disappointed, but everyone gets over it, we'll see some slight fragmentation there. But when there is trauma, when there's true disruptions of safety for a child, they the true self cannot emerge, it's too dangerous, the child has to that modifications have to happen to create safety. And that will come out through trauma responses, whether that's fight, flight, freeze, fawn, any of those kinds of responses may come up, but the child is now pulled off the track of the true self. Now the self is a survival self that modifies they can attach, it's not even about love. It's about attachment. Attachment is survival. The fragmentation of the self is part of what happens as part of that trauma exposure. And another way we think about it is kids that come through. , disruptive families, let's just say not necessarily traumatic, but they oftentimes will adopt a persona, the angel, the high performer, the clown, the disruptor, the, , the, the one that's getting in all the trouble, the rebel, , , it's not their true self, it's something that is correct, working for them, it's working for them. , these adaptations, ultimately, either work or the child collapses. , , and that's a child. This is a submit response. Why do you? Think, boy, we got to go back to the original narrative here. But why do you think 87 or more of people in the professional rankings in, , elite sport in the US, at least, when they retire are broke, are, , kind of a kind of a mess in the retirement phase? , why do you think that is? My here's I have a few hypotheses about that, , it's, to me, it's what I call the one trick pony hypothesis, ? It's imagine you go to school, and the only thing you learned was math. . And that's it from day one, there's no reading, there's no writing, there's just math, math, math, math, math. And by the time you're in high school, you're actually doing relatively high level math, but you can't write a sentence. You can't, you don't know what the capital of anything is. You couldn't even, , pick out Australia on a map, but my gosh, you can do math. . And if there is no math job, if whatever the world uses math differently, AI comes and takes it comes. And if there is no math job, if whatever the world uses math differently, AI comes and takes it comes. And if there is no math job, if whatever the world uses math differently, AI comes and takes it comes. But I think at a deeper level, it's the identity gets fully immersed in the activity. Identity and activity are not the same thing. They're separate things. A human being engages in activity, but we are not the activity. But for a person who takes on elite athletics, they are the quarterback. They are the point guard. This is why I say the most dangerous phrase, , for athletes is I'm an athlete. I'm an athlete. I'm an athlete. I'm an athlete. I'm an athlete. Exactly. It's the most dangerous thing that they can do. parents that, , when you introduce your son or daughter, whoever, , this is Johnny, he's a quarterback. This is Johnny. He's an athlete. This is Johnny. , this is Johnny. And then let Johnny, , talk about being Johnny. And there is a, there's much in that identity and that, and that, that the existence as an athlete, because it starts young for children, it does shape identity. It's not if I went to go become a ceramicist tomorrow. I'm never going to at any point in my life for the rest of my life, call myself a ceramicist. My identity is fully baked, cooked and on the shelf. anything I take on now will not shape identity. Identity had to come from that because it came during the social developmental arc where personality and sense of self were developed. While we're on identity, what does your identity rest on? My personal identity rests on my personal identity. If I now I would say it rests on. Experience culture. The roles I take I'm a mother. I didn't have that role, , 25, 25 years ago. the roles I hold in the world. And without a better way of saying this, there's an inherent Romney NIST to me. And many of the things I experienced as an almost 60 year old woman now, we're exactly the same things I experienced as a five-year-old child, the five-year-old actually, in some ways, got it. All along. But many societal forces conspire to almost sort of again, that's the fragmentation to take that away. That's not really what you want. And I certainly made choices in my life that weren't congruent with the true self that was already emerging at the age of five. , it's a beautiful proposition, which is the true self is there. It's there always there. , always there. One of our first principles here at finding mastery is that everything you need is already inside you. Yes, meaning that the all of the raw materials there and part of our job is. , kind of chivalry chiseling away at David, it's already in there. We just got to see what the potentiality is and help support and challenge people towards that aim. But it's already in there. It's not some version of you later. Nope. , the it's if you're on if you think I do the version model in this respect, let's say version you're on version eight of yourself. It's but version 10 is the absolute you it's not something you need to build towards. It's get closer to home. Correct. Correct. And I think. That as social societal expectations start to fall by the wayside. This is why with age you sometimes see people landing in this more authentic true self space because the societal pressures have been lifted. There's no there's no picket fence pressure. There's no go become a parent. There's no get married. It's I mean, that's it that the gloves are off. It's done. And now what's left is really who are you? You went through all the hurdles. What's left? There are still old fools. There are still old fools and they're often the narcissist. there you go. Finding master is brought to you by Felix Gray. And one of the biggest challenges we face today is our sheer amount of screen time. It messes with our sleep clarity, even our mood. And that's why I've been using Felix Gray glasses. What I appreciate most about Felix Gray is that they're not just another Wellness product. They're rooted in real science developed alongside leading researchers and ophthalmologists. They've demonstrated that these types of glasses. They boost melatonin. They help you fall asleep faster and hit just a little bit deeper in the stages of rest. And when I'm on the road bouncing between time zones slipping on my Felix grays in the evening. It's the simple way to cue my body to wind down and when I'm locked into deep work, they help me stay focused for longer without this digital fatigue. It starts to creep in plus I think they look great. If you're ready to feel the difference for yourself. Felix Gray is offering all finding mastery listeners. 20 off. just head to Felix gray.com and use the code finding mastery 20 at checkout again. That's about Felix. F-E-L-I-X-G-R-A-Y.com and use the code finding mastery 20 at Felix gray.com for 20 off back home back on the top. , hit the first two. Let's go to all five characters. . the next one is start with the first two just kind of the first two is the first was the low empathy. The second was a pathological selfishness. The third is what I call. Sort of the grandiosity circumplex. And what I mean by that is sitting in grandiosity is the stuff entitlement. I am special and extraordinary. The rules do not apply to me, but the hypocrisy is the rules definitely apply to you. it's the it's the fantasy. It's the fantasy of the perfect love story. The perfect home the perfect job the perfect life, and social media took that and put a megaphone. On that because once upon a time, we didn't know what anyone's life looks . Now, we have this manufactured version of everyone's life. We can peer into but it's that all that grandiosity stuff comes together and entitlement arrogance. All of that are manifestations of that grandiosity. Now in some cases, the grandiosity looks almost delusional, but it's it's a key defining element of narcissism. let's let's go to the origin story a little bit. I mean, I know you're moving away from. NPD as a disorder. There is a spectrum that you would say is fair, ? there's some people that have that are low on the spectrum. They have some of these characteristics and some have a lot. I think the number is somewhere between two and six percent, , in the in the US have NPD. If you open the spectrum up where it's problematic 12 12 and if you were to walk into the halls of a world-class. Football team or world-class basketball, what would you think is the coaches slash athlete mix 20 to 25 and if you were in a stadium? you're not in the locker room, but you're in a stadium. What percentage of people are narcissists in the stadium? The fans. , the fandom 15 15 to 16. . And if you're walking outside of the US anywhere, does that know these numbers change? That's the great question. I got me. I'm and even some of them are spitballs in the stadium and the athletic one. I know we're just a little bit. . Oh, you're confident that the 25. -huh. I am coming down. I could even be hired. I thought you were being conservative. I am being conservative. It could be as high as 30. . . , I would say that around the world the numbers that 12 number of enough narcissism to be noticeable. I would not be surprised if that number held globally. I do think that there may be. Cultures out there where cooperation and collaboration are valued where emotional expression is not as pathologized. Maybe it's lower. I just can't. I've got to be frankly. I'm not sure what that. , I don't know. Culture would be because I think pretty much all cultures that have any form of capitalistic vein running through them. The hierarchical build of that culture is just it's pretty much that's going to allow narcissism to it's going to make it an incentivizing. , it's pro-social in a capitalistic society. , it's be ambitious get after it go for it and to do that. You got to feel you're special. You got to feel , there's it's pro-social in sport and high-performing environments to have some of these characteristics and we know I think it was 2015 at a University of Bangor is that people that fell in the spectrum of narcissistic characteristics it that facilitated higher performance hundred percent by the way. I completely can I completely see that. I mean, there's no two-way there. Why wouldn't it? , speak to the parent that has that wants to do the best for their child. What can parents do to support children that don't fall in the on this spectrum, but really our great citizens and great performers. Basically, you're saying I've got a kid who's a great performer. We're going to list to use your athletics example to start with here kid. Who's got all the all the raw material to be the great athlete. They're doing good. They're doing nice. They're doing . And they really they what they're doing. , and they're a good kid. , they play nice. They , they're collaborative with their peers and all of that. I would say you want to you want to attune to that child. You want to model empathy for that child. You want to give your child room to breathe and what I mean by that is the parent who is too overzealous. Because you have a kid who tries to do everything in a way that he has to find a break from and he can be very imaginative. But if you tasty as an Salih. And allow that child who is, and you're at risk for optimism Mom, that's not how this would not work. You or your teachers that ask you these questions. You have to always be open with your teacher back onner. Very dismissed. if you're thinking about being ahead of time in your life, have a chance. , you wipe out the kid with, I'm going to do something else, the rest of the thought process until that kid recovers. I had kids who weren't athletes, I had kids who were performed on stage in musicals and stuff that. The temptation I'd have to fight and I didn't always succeed at it, , instead of asking about rehearsal or how's it coming with the show, it's , tell me things, how's it? In the language I would grow up speaking, my parents spoke to me, I should say, it was the direct translation would be, tell me, tell me something. And that, , tell me things. What is your native tongue? Telugu, it's a Southern Indian language, but that was, I just saw my parents this weekend. It's tell me things. How do you say that? Chapu. Chapu? Chapu. Means tell me things? Tell me things. And then that, what I about that open-ended is , away my son would be , , what do you want me to say? , tell me something. But he can't say, how was school? Fine. . you can't give the one word, tell me things. what? what my wife says, she's Cuban, she says, she says, any news about any news? , I that. , and it's an all encompassing, , , , . what would, let's go back to the car ride home. What would you ask? What would you guide our parent community to ask or do after practice? Open-ended, , whatever the version of tell me things that would work with your kid. Nothing, nothing at all. Want to hear about my day? Can I tell you a little bit about something I saw today? And don't make it about that boss, say, the strangest thing happened to me today. I saw SpaceX launch and it looked a giant jellyfish across the sky. Or I saw a tree fall across the street. And your kid might be looking at you quizzically, but there's a magic to this, which is you're not just that. ? now a conversation could come of this. Or my kids, when they were a little younger, but they were still performing, we did the whole high-low thing. , what's the best thing that happened today? What's the worst thing that happened today? You want to hear mine? . You're also trying to facilitate that reciprocity. , , want to hear what the good thing I haven't, my bad thing that happened? And you're trying to engage them on something more than the sports team. Who's going to be starting on Saturday? , what did coach say about that? , that thing we were practicing last week? Is that working? Because this is now the parent getting ego gratification from the child's performance. And that's really where it falls apart. Or actually, what's the best thing that happened? Because that showed, of course, how much the ego is losing control of the race. I remember one of the kids giving this alarm hit. imatfo was literally butchering I got caught, all across the stadium. And my kid said, Dad, hi, Dad. I've been fighting the entire season for a year watching it. I'm all fired up. And then I was back, hold on guys. You see, what I'm happening? I just get angry. Because it nonetheless feels my kid, And if he goes, fine, dad, , oh, I got the message. If he goes, it was really good. I did that, did that, did that. And I'm , oh, there's a thing here. And then if he does , it was . And it's kind of in the middle and he doesn't want to have a hard conversation or whatever. I'll do one more click and I'll say, oh, , what'd your coaches have to say to you about? And I will ask that question. I heard it in your narrative just really. And I'll ask that as one more thing to see if he wants to explore, ? And then he'll say something , if he goes there or not, if he doesn't, I'll say, oh, how was school? , it's my first catch up with him. It's always, I get to school, but it's , if you just, the kid's walking out of school and I'm talking about something else, it's weird. Yes. it feels I'm meeting him, I'm greeting him with what he just did. Yes, but that's why something even more open-ended is, it's almost , tell me something, tell me, tell me things. Say it again in your native tongue. Chapu. Chapu. , and it's , , an older family member will sit down and say, chapu, and then it's, I know what they want. They want to hear, it's almost they don't care. I could talk about my kids. I could talk about my car. I could talk about my job. It's sort of, what do you got? , now let's say you're in a relationship with a narcissist, ? How do if you're in a relationship with a narcissist or, I'm going to be provocative here, you're just kind of a mess yourself. , you raise an interesting question, ? I think that in people who are, in narcissistic relationships, will experience an interesting dichotomy. They will say, what's interesting? I love my job. I feel really competent at work. I had such a good time with my friends last Saturday at that, , girls dinner we had or whatever. But when I'm at home, I feel incompetent. I feel crazy. I feel I am greedy, or selfish, or stupid. there is, I do see this at many survivors is, there's competence in other areas of their life. I have friends. I my work. I volunteer at my kid's school, but I get home to my spouse. And it is the one place where I literally feel I've lost the plot. And when a person's in a narcissistic relationship, and they do have other supports, what we'll see is that relationship is a place where a person feels a lot of psychological, incompetence, and even hurt, sadness, invalidation. People will say they lose their confidence as a result of the relationship. They think they're to blame for all the problems in the relationship. And for me as a therapist, the ringer for me is when a client comes in and start, especially in the first three to five sessions, for people who are in narcissistic relationships, where I can see their healthy self, they will spend a lot of time in there saying, I'm confused about what I'm doing wrong. we, we're not doing it . We, I, I seem , I feel all I do is say the wrong thing. He's always mad at me. I, , or he's cheating on me. And I feel I can't talk about it. There's a lot of self, , what am I doing wrong? When the person comes in and they're just loading and reloading on my partner is a narcissist. My partner's a piece of this, my brother, and all they're doing is it's, can you believe how bad my partner's, can you believe the terrible thing they did? Can you believe, can you believe? When the entire focus is on the terribleness of the partner, I have to go digging a little deeper because that they, the analysis is not willing because most people who are really going through narcissistic relationships, it tends to get turned inward. What's wrong with me? , because the response is, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. This is my fault. I'm to blame. Maybe I'm saying it wrong. Maybe this is my fault. Maybe they are wrong. Maybe I am this selfish because of what narcissistic people do. They always are. They're always turning it around. You're selfish. Why are you needy? You always ask for much. if the other person in the relationship is expressing a need, a narcissistic partner will accuse that other partner of being demanding in essence. And if that's something that someone's heard before in their life from a narcissistic parent or even someplace else, it really can stick and hold true. you might say, oh my gosh, I am selfish. , I'd love for you to speak to two people, one, start wherever you want, of course, but one is the partner. let's speak into the partner that has, they saw themselves in this conversation. They're , oh my God, my partner, I think is. it is really confusing at home. And I'm kind of overwhelmed. I'm a little scared. I don't feel good about myself, but in other places, I feel I'm pretty good. It's just , Ooh, I'm walking on some eggshells and dah, . that person. And then maybe you can also speak to somebody who is, , if I'm thinking about the spectrum, not the NPD, we know that they don't really change because they lack insight. But slide. But even anywhere on the NPD doesn't make it more or less severe. It's that most narcissistic people don't have a lot of self-reflection and insight. slide way down the spectrum to somebody who sees some of the characteristics that you're describing, they are high performers and they're , whoa, wait, I hear my wife in this. I hear my husband in this, , I don't want to be that person, but I do think I have some of these traits or, or patterns. Can you speak to both? These are the ones that I have hope for. . , again, when you talk about the spectrum of narcissism, think of it this way. And there was remaining five traits, by the way, are things are on top of the three I've already shared are the, the fourth one is an excessive need for praise, admiration, and validation. . And the last one is impulsivity, dysregulation and poorly managed emotions. . that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, what is that asked for me to depth. . If I knew that, because my closest friend is an hurts most . Especially in hiding emotions, especially at times of frustration For, for Harmony list all five. it's the, the, the low empathy, the transactional order, the sort of let's call it the twisted empathy, pathological selfishness, the excessive need for admiration and validation, the whole grandiosity secondplex, and the impulsivity and poorly regulated, his emotion, especially anger. When basically they don't get their way. , . . got to have all five every time whether it's mild or severe that's a really important character defining characteristic is that if you only have three of them no i'm that i'm not talking about narcissism with you that's interesting because i put if you've got three of them i put that on the spectrum but you're saying no not much not much because listen here's the thing all these five things are highly intercorrelated it's very hard to get without the five you're changing my model a little bit which i because i've always done full npd spectrum of npd or spectrum and if you've got you don't full all five i always put as npd but if you have three of these no you're saying no i'm not i'm saying no absolutely no npd it's a five out of nine it's the stuff i'm talking about but in order for something to be defined as a personality disorder you've got the sort of the added piece that a licensed clinician has to look at but this is what i'm doing wait but i'm saying if you don't have all five you're not npd you're not a disorder if you had three of those with a couple of the other lower characteristics ones i think you're on the spectrum but here's the thing with npd those nine things they boil down to these five you see what i'm saying there's an essence there's you don't see a spectrum then i do see a spectrum and the spectrum is mild to severe narcissism correct you don't have all five or you say you do have all five all five always comes every time if you've got a person who is selfish entitled it needs to be the center of attention but they don't have that that reactivity and anger or passive aggression silent treatment when they're frustrated and they don't have the i'm going to be hard to have this without but they tend to have relatively intact empathy this is where we start getting into areas of privilege can really muddy the waters and what i always say that there's some people out there with much money their feet never touch the ground they go from a car and someone opens the car door and they go into an impeccably clean house and the snack they want is waiting for them which they don't have to clean up after they don't do all this juicy mess of messy life stuff they don't and yes exactly they don't wait in line at trader joe's they're not worrying about child care arrangements they don't sit in traffic they do not wait in airport lines none of this is their stuff their feet don't touch the ground folks that are 100 used to the world running on their schedule and to their whims they want to go to the hamptons this weekend then within an hour someone's going to make sure they go to the hamptons when they get there the precise drawbridge is going to be there and they're going to be able to get to the hamptons and they're going to be able to go to the city among people they have 975 memory of a permit in they're growing rich they been living in London for the last five years America was millionaires dealing with gold rush Fort grabbed gold again in 1990 when they became rich you had to move outcomes onto bandits completely geht jealousy and anandlexia res headlights and climate protestipsyou were able to get all of that around and that's when you look back on the world and if it's government today understanding a lot is suspicious you think this is a LLC they're buying it they say eat it they're doing it they have this war for 500 million dollars that's where we have! that's why I tell nonprofits I'm sure it's a serious crisis as the government is he's got to learn tosted that I just know I've got to find it now what we impressive allowed. we miss the essence of why this thing has to hang together and why many people are overusing the word because that privileged person they're not narcissistic people that i know people that and i'm i think to myself i don't know that they get my life but if i explain my life they might say that's really difficult and mean it and they're saying is there a way i could support in some way even though they're far away from it they care about me and i sense that as a caring it's not a it's not contemptuous it's not dismissive nor is it cognitive they just aren't in it what if you have four and you regulate your emotions pretty if you have four and you regulate your emotions pretty i would say i love this conversation i know we're not even to the relationship bit because this is what i see in elite performing environments they have to regulate their emotions pretty they can be intolerant to the standard to other people but it's facilitating growth let me ask you this do you think they're doing it in their close personal relationships at home with the partner with the kids i do with you do you think every i think they're they manage their emotions they're pretty in those spaces when they're frustrated when they're disappointed when the deal doesn't go through of course i'm talking about some yes the dysregulation when things don't come the way they want them to because they're not seen they're not validated they're not they didn't get their way they're somebody thwarted their plan whatever it may be and to remain regulated in the face of that i you're saying i don't think no that probably gives hope to a lot of people actually that the worst listening to this conversation is it me is it me and if you're regulating your because i'm actually pretty chill the emote their emotional regulation piece is such a it's unsettling to the partners of your family members because this person who's coming and you're that hyper vigilance that Eggshell walking as it were it's carrying a live grenade for everyone in the family are they going to come home and blow up what's going to set them off now the key becomes and sometimes this hypothesis doesn't get tested for a really long time is there a period of time that things are going for this person for such a five years 10 years 15 years 20 years their ideas keep launching they have plenty of money in the bank they're getting award after award everyone's applied to the sport that's going to be a real challenge in a really long time it's i'm doing something but i'm not bakey complicated i'm not a no-brainer for anybody that kind of stuff in the plotting them, you're the best, you're a genius, you're this. And the things that go wrong are the little glitches along the way. But by and large, everything is on that forward trajectory. That is a very fortunate and supplied person, they may be less likely. But the argument would make be in narcissism, then that just moves the goalposts, because now anything is going to set them up. What do you mean my jets not ready to go at 1205, it's going to be 1208. Instead, you could see that. But I think that dysregulation piece is a pretty classical part of narcissism. , very cool. , let's go into the partner stuff. Can you speak to somebody that is let's go to let's go to the partner, not to the what I was saying, the hopeful narcissist spectrum person, not yet, let's go to the partner, we know that they don't change because of insight, we know that if you bring them into therapy, they tend to, if the therapist is not tuned, woo the therapist. Yes. And all of a sudden, now, let's use the bonus word, the client feels gaslit even more. But the there's a thing that's happening where now it's set back the person's sense of agency and strength, because their, their clinician is or their therapist is aligning with the narcissist. , speak, hope, and, and applied practice to the person that's in a relationship with somebody who's narcissist. when a person is in a relationship with someone who's narcissist,nie , also talk to that person then, the Helala help them achieve that. It wants you to accept. anyway, this one, let's say, , I was with someone but I have a niveau, I wanna see them at the same time. And I am happy, with this guy, with this class of sobriety. . And they're guy. there's really no pleasure out of the stuff that once was joyful and pleasurable in life. And then we also see even things poor self care, not eating as , not sleeping as . That's what tends to happen to people. It's depressing. , it is depressing. . And it and what happens then is that the person in the relationship, in a way is fading more and more and more. And they themselves wonder, , maybe it is me, because I'm the one who's sort of stopped taking care of myself. And I'm kind of always a downer. But as they understand that the behavior in the relationship is unacceptable, and where it gets tricky is if the partner is very successful, they live in a beautiful home, they get to have lots of great experiences, they all the cars and the kids get to go to the fancy schools and all the stuff, ? There is a sense of almost guilt. , I've got all the bells and whistles. Maybe this is it. maybe I'm holding out for too much. And there can be a real sense of shame and self-pity. And I'm , I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to take that self blame of I'm still complaining and I have all this stuff. there's also that can it's a guilt, it's a guilt. And that's a guilt is a very common reaction and survivors in these relationships. The challenges though, and this is what makes you narcissistic relationships such a unique space for the partners, a partner of somebody who's an addict, a partner of somebody living with a severe mental illness, a partner of somebody living with dementia, partner of live someone living with a physical illness. There's a lot of empathy for that partner. We're , wow, they're really having to walk a difficult path here of the the ups and downs of their partner who's going through this hard thing. But the partner of someone who's narcissistic doesn't have that. Because by and large, the world sees the narcissistic partner as a titan, as a winner, as amazing, as helpful as generous, they paid for this one to go get this and they did that and they picked up the check and they took everyone on a vacation. And they're charming and they're charismatic and they hold court at the table. And isn't this all grand. And the partner, it's what I call sort of the dinner party effect. They're at the dinner party, and everyone's laughing at their stories. And even the partners , , I was wrong. They're a good guy. And the minute the car door closes, it's criticism, it's anger. It's , why did you make me look bad? Did you really have to bring up that I worked with that other company once upon a time? Really? Can the partners thinking , they didn't even think anything of it. now, the partner feels smaller and smaller and smaller. Over time, you'll see people in these narcissistic relationships really become silenced because they're afraid anything they say is going to get them into trouble. But the world is often seeing what seems a really put together person. , how do you help guide them? Stay or go? the stay or go conversation, I tend to be agnostic to that I say I'm going to help you whether you stay or go because staying or going, there's many elements there. I mean, one of the things that's crucial is, is obviously the practical finances, minor children, other logistical stuff, cultural relationships, big, , cultural is really big, it may not be permissible in a culture to get divorced, or you would lose a lot of social support or social status, family of origin, you might lose your family of origin, , you may not want to do the whole family court fandango. There's all of that, then there are what we call the trauma bonded pieces. These are things they feel real, but it's things , I have hope change. I don't want this next person they're going to meet to get this better version of them that I that I created, ? I'm , No, no, no, it's just version 1.0 forever. you really don't need to worry about this. it's a, there's all these other fears that come as a fear of being alone, some of the standard existential fears, old fears of abandonment that come up from the idea of a relationship ending. When we talk about more severe narcissism, where it's more malignant, exploitative, coercive, people are also afraid what would happen if they did leave, it's a phenomenon called post separation abuse, meaning we could see stalking smear campaigns, spreading of rumors, sharing of inappropriate information, sharing of confidences that shouldn't be broken, manipulating minor children, manipulating adult children, , hassling people legally through family court, if the if the narcissistic partners more better resourced, they can really, really do a number on someone. some people are also afraid of that. there's quote, they're not really staying as much as they're avoiding that horrific outcome. But one of my friends, I'll just kind of do a parallel. He said, when we're talking about water, use it, he's a nutrition specialist. And he says, Look, either you have a filter, or you are the filter. , you there's a corollary in how you described it's you can stay, but you become a filter for some toxins. It's good. It's more . In other words, it's this the staying is a slower burn in terms of healing. . Healing. There's, there's a concept. Can you fully heal? He can. I mean, I guess it comes down to what do we mean by feeling? I, you can, if you stay, can you flourish? I think you can in very circumscribed ways. , it's super. It's a narrow path. Because, , as I always tell people, if you stay, you can't share your good news with your narcissistic partner, you can't share your bad news with your narcissistic partner. you kind of got to stick to the indifferent. You're talking about the weather. You're talking about the, , the who won the Academy Award, , you're talking about, they're building a new restaurant in town. A lot of people say, , that's not really a relationship. I'm , no, it's all your relationship ever really was. Now we've just lifted the conflict out of it. Talk about your deep model. That is a model. It's just a quick acronym rubric for people to remember to not engage in these relationships, especially if they decide to stay or have ongoing contact. And the don't go deep means don't defend, don't engage. Don't explain and don't personalize. The mistake people make in narcissistic relationships is they engage as though the narcissistic person is listening with the whole mind, ? The narcissistic person is already this going to is listening only in a way that's self serving. if you're defending yourself, they're going to gaslight. If you're explaining yourself, they're going to gaslight and explain gaslighting and gaslighting is it is a form of emotional abuse, where a person's reality, memory, perceptions, experiences are denied. And then the person is told that they are somehow lacking or there's something wrong with them. Gaslighting is not lying, ? lying would be I never said that you never saw me there. I've never talked to her. That's lying. , gaslighting is I never said that. But what, you've become paranoid since our second child was born. , you've become paranoid since Charlie was born. And I really got to wonder, , maybe this is some of your cuckoo coming back. That's what makes it gaslighting. I thought that gaslighting also involved. What do you mean? , , you saw me holding hands with somebody, you didn't see me holding hands with somebody. That's the first part, you got to have the second, you got to have the second, you got a second, which is , , are you ? , , . it's not a blatant, ? You get weird around your period this. , that's what makes it the gaslighting. Keep going. What are some other subtle forms of gaslighting? Because you can be you can gaslight people and not be a narcissist. You're, you're, you're, you're too sensitive is a form of gaslighting. ? Because in saying that what you're saying is there's something wrong with you. You misperceive situations, ? we're talking, and you have a reaction. And I'm , Oh, my God, you're just too sensitive. That's a gaslight. . Why are you sensitive? Why are you sensitive? , boy, I can't say anything. I can't say anything. That's a gaslight. , . . I think I kind of had the term a little misconstrued here. a lot of people do. , people do. , I thought it was a manipulation of someone's truth. No, no, no, no manipulation. It's a manipulation. It's a manipulation of truth, but also the doubling. In fact, Theo door, Pat, who was a psychiatrist who wrote about this a long time ago, he called it the double whammy. It's not just that manipulation of reality. It's then the further manipulation of reality by dissembling the other person. You're nuts. , oh, my goodness. And psychology is complicated, it's complicated, but it's also quite simple. In what , in a way, I hate to say it, but destroying a person's psyche is a pretty straightforward process. Oh, that I and narcissists will be love that wired. , from that lens. Yes. And , the old adage, you got to tear them down to build them up. And I think it's really easy to tear someone down, but really hard to build someone back up. And you got to be very, very skilled if you're going to adopt that model for coaching or whatever issue. By the way, I think it's a terrible. I personally, think as a psychologist, I think trauma informed. , I'm not a fan. I'm definitely not a fan. And I don't think there's a single piece of trauma literature that, , I think the way a trauma informed model would be is that if someone is torn down, we can build them back up. But we should not intentionally set out to tear them down. If you think about Viktor Frankl, ? Viktor Frankl be , now kids, do not go out seeking suffering on your own. It will find you. , . don't go make a mess of your life to try to test this out. We've referenced number of times in the conversation he because there is a prevailing bit of research that there's more men there with narcissism than women. Do you have a theory of why that is? I don't know why that is. , just let me put sort of the qualifier in there. There are different forms of narcissism, the sort of the big three are grandiose, vulnerable and malignant narcissism, ? There's some other subtypes, but we stick with the big three. grandiose narcissism is that arrogant, charming, charismatic, look at me, I'm great. I'm gonna I'm the king of everything. That's the grandiose narcissists. The malignant narcissist is sort of that dark tetrad, the sort of the overlap of psychopathy, narcissism, sadism and Machiavellianism. Wow. . And vulnerable narcissists are vulnerable narcissism. This is the money shot because we don't talk about this enough. And even the formulations on vulnerable narcissism. They've really only been discussed in earnest for about the past 20 years. Running Stan, these are the researchers in this the most cunning of them all. cunning and not cunning, the vulnerable narcissists are who end up in our offices, because the vulnerable narcissistic folks are more likely they don't present with the charm and the charisma and the and the dazzle. They actually are more often to present as failure to launch passive aggressive, victimize, aggrieved and disenfranchised. And that's what makes them dangerous, because they still have the entitlement, the selfishness, the dysregulation. This is every internet troll. This is a dangerous I actually think in some ways the vulnerable narcissists are every bit as dangerous as the malignant narcissists. And since these subtypes can combine, malignant, vulnerable narcissists are the most dangerous people in the world. And I want to say one piece about gender narcissism. In all forms of narcissism, men more often than women accept vulnerable narcissism, and that's equal. across genders, vulnerable, vulnerable narcissism equal men and women, but malignant and grandiose. I think girls are actually still to this day told to sort of dial it down a little bit in terms of, , the, , the even on the field, the kind of if I can curse the shit talking and stuff that, girls are tend not to be socialized to do that as much. Nor do girls tend to lean into behaviors physical bullying and physical intimidation. That stuff is probably going to code more towards grandiose and malignant narcissism. And I think that's the thing that I think is really important to think about is that there are certain traits and qualities that are more tolerated in men. Whereas the vulnerable narcissism that that patterning can is actually experienced in both men and women and most clients I've worked with who've had narcissistic mothers almost, almost without exception, it's been a vulnerable narcissistic I wrote a white paper for a protein that I was working with on how to hit I didn't want to call it borderline or narcissism, I said how to handle difficult personalities. And it works Clo j o m. . . And it can create that sense of shame. And if there's one other than protecting all children from trauma, if we did that, we'd probably erase narcissism. But until we're not doing that on my watch, I wish we could, I'd be out of a job. All of us would be out of a job. But in the absence of that, creating many, many more experiences for boys, especially starting in middle school, to be more emotionally vulnerable. I think the little guys, they're able to do it. little boys can be emotionally vulnerable and available. You hit those hormones. And what we still have not figured out is how to bridge that gap into puberty, where sexuality and emotions and hormones and all of that are raging. And that we as a culture do not hold, I don't think any culture does it , hold space for men and boys to be vulnerable without pathologizing them as weak. And without that vent, I do think that the grandiose and the malignant narcissism are more likely than to be expressed. The girls are allowed, amongst peers with other adults to be able to express emotion. And I'm using a binary gender characterization because that's the research we've got. Very cool. I want to introduce you to, very cool, very scary, very cool how clearly you are. . I want to introduce you to Scott Barry Kaufman's work, Cognitive Psychologist, that just released a book on this good mind, good sound bit of research on victimhood. Any points of vulnerable narcissism as kind of the archetype of it. look, I could, I could, I could, I could, I could, I could, I could go on and on. This is great. Thank you. We have to do it again sometime. I really enjoyed all of this. thank you for the clarity of, of, of thinking, the frameworks you're working from. And I loved your book. I love that you also dedicated it to your mom. If you had one to three books that you would hope people would read, what would they be? It would be Trauma and Repair by Judith Herman. That's a, that's a given. I would say Man's Search for Meaning by Viktor Frankl, and Existence by Rollo May. done. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Brilliant. Thank you much. It was lovely. It's , such a fascinating conversation. I really appreciated this opportunity. Next time on Finding Mastery, we're joined by Sahil Bloom, investor, writer, and creator of the Curiosity Chronicle. In this high energy conversation, Sahil shares the simple frameworks and mental models that helped him go from burnout and pressure to purpose and play. It's a fresh take on ambition, identity, and redefining success. Join us on Wednesday, August 6th, 9 a.m. Pacific for this insightful conversation.