Now, there we go. Sorry about that. , before we jump in today, I want to emphasize something that they mentioned earlier in the announcements about church membership. It's been an exciting season that we're in, a season of growth. Many of you are newer to the church. And if you're interested in becoming officially a part of us, we would love that. There's a brief application, but it's basically saying I'm all in. I'm officially a part. I want to support what God is doing through this local body and help carry the load into the future. We believe God has great things in store for our church and for our community in this area. And we'd love for you to be a part. And if you would just see somebody in the back, you can also check out more of what this means on our website under the membership link. And it'll give you more of an idea about what does that entail. And just that it's not just about being in a club. This really is about being. On mission to reach people. I mean, we've got the big letters across the back here among us that you can see every week that we want to love God. We want to love others and we want to make disciples. if you want to be a part of that mission, we'd love to have you officially join us by being a member of our church. All . Let's jump into it today. Last month, if you were here in August, we spent about five weeks walking through this. And we're going to talk about the book of Jonah. And if there's one thing that is pretty obvious from Jonah's story, it's that he definitely heard the voice of God. We see it there in the very first verse of the book that the Lord tells Jonah to go to the city of Nineveh and to announce God's judgment against them. But what we don't see, and we didn't really talk about this during the series. That's why I want to bring it up to you today. What we don't see is Jonah wondering, is this really God telling me this? We see that God spoke, but maybe we don't really know exactly how. Maybe God spoke to him through some kind of messenger an angel. Or maybe God spoke in some sort of audible voice that Jonah could actually hear. Or maybe God just left. This really clear impression on his heart and on his mind. We don't really know the method. But what we don't see is Jonah wondering, was that my voice in my head that told me that? Or was that the devil that told me to do that? Or was it really God? Maybe I just misheard things. That's not what we see. He knew that it was God's voice. But then what did he do? What did he do? the story, he hears God's voice and then does he listen and obey? No, he doesn't. He runs away. He goes the other direction in total disobedience. And that's what led him to the belly of the fish that we read about in the story. I think it raises an important question for you and for me, for all of us. And it's a deep question. How do I hear God's voice? How do I hear? How do I hear God's voice? Because if Jonah heard God's voice and he still disobeyed, then what about us? How does God speak now? How do we really know it's him? How do we really know it's not just our own thoughts and our own feelings? Or even worse, how do we know that it's not just a trick of the enemy that is designed to lead us off course? , I think in order to establish how we hear God's voice, we need to know that God's voice is not just a trick. And , in order to hear God's voice, first we have to believe that God still speaks today. This is an important step in the process here. Because if you don't believe that God is active and that he is involved in the world, that he's involved in his creation, that he's involved in people today, if you don't believe that, then there's no point in really trying to hear his voice. Maybe you don't even believe that there is a God. Maybe you don't believe that there is one, but he's not involved. He's just far off somewhere. Maybe he even created us, but he's not active and involved in our everyday lives. If that's what you believe, then you may not really care about hearing God's voice. But for those of us who believe by faith that the Holy Spirit wants to be fully engaged and wants to be participating in all that we do, it's important that we learn to discern the voice of the Holy Spirit. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. changed and we talked about how we respond to evil in light of the violence in our country that we've seen just with the evil all around us. But as a follow-up to that, the what do we do part, we've got to be able to discern His voice. today, I want to just unpack with you four ways that we can hear and discern God's voice. Because here's the bottom line, if we're going to follow God, if we're going to obey Him, then we have to be able to hear Him clearly. How can you follow and obey if you don't know what you're following or obeying? here's the first one of the four ways that we can hear from the Lord. I'd say four major ways. The first one is that God speaks through us. He speaks through His Word. Also, we call that the Bible. He speaks through His Word. And I really want to emphasize that this is the primary way that God speaks to His people. The Apostle Paul said in 2 Timothy 3.16, all Scripture is inspired by God and is useful to teach us what is true and to make us realize what is wrong in our lives. It corrects us. It corrects us when we are wrong and teaches us to do what is . God uses it to prepare and equip His people to do every good work. did you catch that in the beginning there that all Scripture is inspired by God? Other translations say that it is God-breathed. That means when you open your Bible, you are hearing what God has to say. . This is the primary way. The Bible is the primary way that He speaks to us. And if we look at another spot in Scripture where the Apostle Paul, he says something about this that's really important. He says it to his spiritual son named Timothy, who was at the time, he was pastoring as a young man in this huge, major, important city of Ephesus. And in Ephesus, I mean, you had all kinds of challenges facing the church. They had tons of idol worship and paganism. They had false teaching. Even in the Bible, they had false teaching. They had false teaching. They had false teaching. They had false teaching. They were wrestling with the church that they were wrestling with. And, of course, they were dealing with persecution because they were Jesus' followers. And Paul tells his son, his spiritual son, his protege, if you will, Timothy, just one chapter earlier from where we were in 2 Timothy, look at chapter 2, verse 15. He's telling Timothy, be a good worker, one who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly explains the word of truth. Or if you have a King James Version. It says, the one who rightly divides the word of truth. what are we talking about? What does that mean? It means that we don't just take the Bible and just read verses at random and just come up with some off-the-cuff meanings and applications and it's just whatever you see, just go for it. That's not what we do. We study Scripture. We read the Bible through the lens of Jesus. And if we don't explain it or unpack it. Or teach it, learn it, or rightly divide it, then we can end up misunderstanding what God is saying. But when we take into account all of what Scripture says, not just random verse here and there, but what we call the whole counsel of Scripture, and we take into account what Jesus says to us about God and about who He is and what He's doing in this world, when we take all of that into account, we can end up misunderstanding what God is saying. We take all of that into account. We can have confidence in what God is saying in His word, what we're reading. Now, Jonah, he didn't have the New Testament. He lived before Jesus, and that wasn't in his world. But he did have most of the Old Testament. He at least had the first five books of the Bible. He would have had Psalms and Proverbs and a lot of the prophets. He would have had that. And he also had, to his advantage, he had the word of the Lord come directly to him somehow, we talked about a little bit ago. And what did he do? He still didn't listen to the Lord. He still didn't obey God's word. But , I think we're sometimes, we're kind of that, that we want the Lord to speak to us. We want to say, Lord, speak to me. Give me a fresh word. From your heart and from your mouth. And yet at the same time, our Bible just sits on our shelf, getting dusty for months and months and months. There's a new song about that called Dusty Bibles. Anybody heard that one? It hits hard, doesn't it? It says, we've got dusty Bibles, brand new iPhones. But yet the Bible just sits there. And sometimes we search the wrong way, we're , oh God, please speak to me. Speak to me. Speak to me. me. And yet His Word is there for us to consume and to hear from Him. we have to seek out the Word and the message that He's already given. He's already laid it before us, and we in America are privileged to have many Bibles. How many of you own an actual paper Bible? How many of you own one? How many of you own two? How many of you own five? How many own more than 10? Anybody? More than 10? All , I'm going with you. How many own 15? Oh, close. Maybe? , we'll have to check the judges on that. But , I'm sure I do, a few of us do, Noah does. We are privileged in this country. We have endless copies and translations. And we have endless Bibles. We have endless Bibles. We have endless Bibles. We have endless Bibles. We have endless Bibles. We have endless Bibles. We have endless Bibles. Not to mention that even if you don't own a paper Bible, which by the way, we have for you, if you'd one, we will give you one today for free. Just see somebody in the back. But we also have it on our phones. We have all the translations on our phone. We can highlight it. We can save it. We can send it. We can share it. We can put an image behind it. We can do all kinds of things with the Bible. It's amazing. God has already given to us what He wants to say. Now, I want to pause here because I know the dilemma that we have. And I've sat where you are and wondered about this same dilemma and just thinking, oh, , pastor, but the Bible has a lot of different things in it. It has some pretty intense stuff. If you go back to the Old Testament, it's got some pretty violent things, pretty grotesque things, things that sound harsh and judgmental. how does all of that fit into hearing the voice of God today? Dr. Joseph McClary, M.D.: Maybe you've wondered that before, or maybe even now. You're wondering, how does all this work? And it's really an important question to ask. let's talk about it for a minute. One of the keys to bridging the gap, which we could say that there's a gap between the God of the Old Testament and the God of the New Testament, is this, that it's the idea that God has always been the same. Let's start there. He's always been holy. He's always been a God. He's always been a God of justice. He's always been a God of mercy. But here's the thing, the way that God relates to people has shifted depending on which covenant has been in effect, ? the way that God relates to people has shifted depending on which covenant has been in effect. This is important. in the Old Testament, or we could say the old covenant, God gave this nation of Israel some really specific laws. Some were laws about worship, some were about sacrifice, some were ceremonial type laws, some were about how their society should run as a nation. They weren't all just religious laws. Some were moral commands that reflected God's character and God's eternal nature. And , these civil laws and these ceremonial laws that existed in the Jewish temple, they were good and they were for Israel in that season. But they were also pointing forward to something greater. They were pointing forward to the ultimate redemption, the ultimate sacrifice to the coming of Jesus in the New Testament. This is why there is this connection there between the old and the new, and that's why Jesus is important. He's important to the people of Israel. He's important to the people of Israel. He's important to the people of Israel. He's important to the people of Israel. Jesus said in Matthew 5.17, He said, don't misunderstand why I have come. I did not come to abolish or to get rid of or to destroy or to just wipe away. I did not come to abolish the law of Moses or the writings of the prophets. No, I came to accomplish their purpose or to fulfill their purpose. See, when Jesus went to the cross, He was not just a prophet. He was a prophet of the prophets. He was a prophet of the prophets. He was the final sacrifice that He bore the penalty for sin and for death and all of the junk that's in our lives. Up until that point, they had a sacrificial system of sacrificing animals, and they had to continually do that, regular basis, always sacrificing in the temple. But when Jesus came, He was the final Lamb of God. And what happened is we had a covenant shift. He brought us into what we call the covenant of grace or the new covenant. And that's why we have the New Testament. That means that we're not under the old system of civil and ceremonial laws. If you've read the books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, you probably have read a lot of these ceremonial laws, civil laws. , things animal sacrifice, things ceremonial cleansing, that they had to walk through all these steps that they weren't considered unclean. , , we're not under the old system of civil and ceremonial law. We're not under the old system of civil and ceremonial law. We're not under the old system of clean before the Lord. we don't follow all of those things. Obviously, we don't have an altar here for animal sacrifice. And me, for one, I'm thankful for that because I have a pretty big role in that I don't want to participate in, not into killing hundreds and thousands of animals on a regular full-time basis here. we don't do those things. But the heart of God, the heart, the living offering, the food is out. You can store meat, something fresh, something fresh. that you can spray it with any kind of bread and desirable reflejkta, burdensome food, food, see these values are important. Look at every single thing, I believe God is saying, read this book of Exodus for me. Haggag will answer the second question, which really means I think it is important for God toAmerican history, but maybe to American history. And that is setting a have an afterthought on something. teaches on, he doesn't just make these things up. He pulls them from the Old Testament. Things he says, , in the Old Testament where it says that if you commit the physical act with someone, a sexual act, then you've committed adultery. , I would say to you that it's that, but it's also even if you look at someone lustfully that you've committed adultery in your heart. And he takes these teachings to the next level that it's not just about outward appearance and ceremonial things and coming to the events and kneeling and praying and doing all the rituals. He said, but those moral things, the heart of God transfers to the New Testament and you see it on display, especially in the person of Jesus. Let me see if I can illustrate this a little bit, show you a couple of pictures. when your kids are little, you make rules to protect. We talked about littles and sprouts, ? This is especially true for them and maybe a little bit older. You say things, , I would say things , hey, do not run into the street. That's a problem. Don't run into the street or don't touch a hot stove. Now, come on, parents, have you said anything that before? Raise your hand. Don't run in the street. Don't touch the stove. And what do they want to do when you say don't touch the stove? They want to touch the stove. And it's , , go ahead. Go ahead. Let's see what happens. Because you're making these rules that you can protect them because they're little and they don't get it. But those rules, they're not meant to be in place that forever. They were meant to protect and guide my kids in that season of life. Now that they're older, the way that I'm going to relate to them has changed. the principles are still there. It may look different, but the principles are there keeping them safe. It's still something I want to do. It's still part of the value system that I have about keeping my kids safe. Still want to help them grow and understand the world in which they live. Those things haven't changed, but the rules look different now because they've matured. instead of saying don't run across the street, I really don't have to say that anymore. They get it. They're going to look both ways. Now I got a 15-year-old that's going to be driving soon. I'm going to be saying, hey, do not text and drive. Come on, parents. You're there, ? Some of you that have teenagers, do not stay out past this time. The conversation changes because of the stage of life and because of how I relate to my children in that stage. that's one way to understand how God's law, how it worked in the Old Testament. He gave Israel rules for that season, and the rules were designed to point to the future. that's one way to understand how God's law, how it worked in the Old Testament. that's one way to understand how God's law, how it worked in the Old Testament. that's one way to understand how God's law, how it worked in the Old Testament. point them forward to something greater. But now because of Jesus, we've stepped into a different season. We've stepped into maturity. Has God changed? No. God's character remains the same. He's still holy. He's still just. He's still merciful. All of those things remain, but the covenant has changed in the time in which we live. the way that we connect and the way that we relate to God has changed, and He's still just. He's still merciful. All of those things remain, but the covenant has changed. He's still just. He's still merciful. All of those things remain, but the covenant has changed. He speaks to us from the perspective of the finished work of Jesus. That's how God relates to the church today. We're in a different time, a different season. here's another image. We can think of the Old Testament kind of the foundation of the house, that it's strong and it's necessary, and without this foundation, the house wouldn't stand a chance of standing. It would fall. But then we can think of the New Testament kind of the livable space of the house, the livable part. Some of you build houses. You understand how this works. You have a foundation. You have a framework. We could call that the Old Testament. You've got to have it. It's necessary. The New Testament wouldn't really work without the old. It's connected. It's one big story, but it looks different. the New Testament is us walking into the house, and experiencing the house. It's the drywall, and the paint, and the flooring, and the furniture, and the space in which we live today, because it shows us how to live in what God has built for us. The Old Testament, we would say, points forward to Jesus, but the New Testament teaches us how to follow Jesus. The Old Testament, we would say, points forward to Jesus, but the New Testament teaches us how to follow Jesus. In the New Testament, we get to see some shadows of God's redemptive plan, of how He was going to win back humanity. There's foreshadowing, and there's glimpses, and there's pieces, but in the New Testament, that's where we see the substance of God's redemptive plan. We see it in full force being laid out before us, with Jesus on the cross, and in the grave, and the resurrected Jesus. if God's redemptive plan is to win back humanity, then we get to see some shadows of God's redemptive plan. if God's redemptive plan is to win back humanity, then we get to see some shadows of God's redemptive plan. if God's redemptive plan is to win back humanity, then we get to see some shadows of God's redemptive plan. Because that's what Jesus said, I've come to fulfill the law, to complete its purpose. That's how we learn how we walk this out, how we walk in the Spirit. , how do I leave the church today and go, live for Jesus in my job, at my school, at my house. We get practical things from Jesus and from other writers in the New Testament. It's how we learn how to walk in the Spirit. And speaking of the Holy Spirit, that's the second way that we hear the voice of God, is that God speaks through the Holy Spirit. God speaks through the Holy Spirit. And we're a Pentecostal church, and we believe in the full moving and giftings and empowering of the Holy Spirit in this church. And we grab hold of this. This resonates with us that He speaks through the Holy Spirit. Jesus promised us the Holy Spirit in John 16, 13. He said, when the Spirit of truth comes, that's another title for the Holy Spirit, which I love. One of my favorite titles, if not maybe my favorite, but it's one of my favorite titles. And I love it. He's the Spirit of truth. Lord, we need the Spirit of truth in our country today. Spirit of truth, come. When the Spirit of truth comes, He will guide you into all truth. He will not speak on His own, but will tell you what He has heard. Speaking of hearing from the Father, He will tell you about the future. This means that when the Holy Spirit came in Acts chapter 2, that He's still here today. He's been actively moving, and speaking in our world. And He's been guiding us into truth. If we can hear Him, He'll guide us to the truth. Now, sometimes that means He convicts us of sin, of things in our lives that do not belong. That can be the voice of the Holy Spirit. Sometimes He brings a verse or a passage of Scripture to mind, and it's at the time when we need it. That can be the Holy Spirit. Sometimes He just gives us an unexplainable peace in our hearts. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes He gives us a peace of mind. Sometimes it's an uneasiness about a decision that we're faced with. And sometimes He just nudges us to step out of our comfort zone to maybe pray for someone that we wouldn't normally pray for, or in a setting in which we normally wouldn't do that, or to encourage them, or even to warn them. That could be the voice of the Holy Spirit. Now, Jonah, if we go back to him, he didn't listen. He tried to run from God's presence. He tried to run from the Holy Spirit, but he should have remembered what David said in Psalms about 200 years before Jonah. He should have remembered Psalm 139, 7 and 8, where David said, where can I go from your spirit? Where can I flee from your presence? If I go up to the heavens, you are there. If I make my bed in the depths or in the grave, you are there. There's nowhere we can run from the Holy Spirit. And Jonah learned this the hard way, that even in the belly of a fish in the sea, God's Spirit was there with him, offering him a way out. you can ignore the Holy Spirit. Yes, we can do that. We can ignore Him, but what you can't do? You can't outrun Him. He has a relentless pursuit of our hearts. And practically speaking, one major component of what we would call spiritual maturity is the importance that we place on prayer. We're people of prayer. But let me get a little bit more specific. We talk about hearing the voice of the Lord in prayer. It has to include listening in prayer. Listening. How much do we talk about prayer and listening in the context of prayer? I don't know that we do it enough, but just imagine with me there's a pie chart. And it's whatever it is in your mind. And it's a pie chart of the time that you spend in prayer, whatever time that is, whether it's five minutes or an hour or whatever. Just think of a day. What would it look if you were to divide your prayer time into sections and percentages? you've got the requests for stuff. What percentage would that be, do you think? mentioning problems that need to be fixed? Or what about, , protection for your family or prayers for your family? What about the percentage of time listening? What do you think on a pie chart that would be? Would that be an even tinier sliver that's on there? , is it almost unnoticeable? It's just almost looking a line where it's 1? Or would it be greater? Is that something that you've put into practice? I think it's something we need to think about. We need to be aware of. The listening, the heart. And if we translate that into our relationships with other people, , no one would ever do in their marriages or in their friendships or work relationships what we often do in our prayer lives, where we just go on and on with this kind of impersonal monologue or list of things that we just got to say and get them out there we could say we prayed. And these are all the things that I want, and here's when I want them. Lord, if you could just take care of me. of that we're at a drive-through window or something that's a lot of what people think of when they think of prayer or even when people would say and i never this phrase say your prayers say your prayers if there was ever a more impersonal phrase than that it's somebody saying hey make sure you do the talkings to your wife do make sure you say all that stuff to her what i thought are we supposed to i'm supposed to let her talk too i thought this was a relationship i thought this was a conversation no relationship would last if that's all we did just went up to him and said hey it's good to see you i got a list here i need you to come at four tomorrow and make sure you stop by the grocery store on the way and don't get don't get that brand make sure you get the other brand and let's see we got the kids practice tomorrow and we're just going through the list and if you could take care of that for me we'll see you tomorrow what relationship is going to last based on that i don't know you guys are quiet my relationship would not last through the evening i promise you if that's all it is just given these orders to each other but when it comes to god we say oh say your prayers and we have these memorized things and we now i live bless it and i live now and we've been told it three times every word eight times in the gloria of god and then and you're it's that the spirit leader gegangen you've done it this is your dream song let yourself live however many prayers i think you just already do i'll do what i want to do now you're ready say what my thoughts are when you come to me they will not stop but i promise you will save me and i promise if their hearts are ruined even if they're broken but now you won't be my siblings Creator. Prayer isn't always talking. We also learn this from Jesus, both in what He said and what He did in His actions. something we see Him doing often in the Gospels is He would get away from people, from everyone. He would be alone with God. And this was where He would recharge, where He would get the download from the Father about His Father's plans and His assignments for Him. Because remember, He said, I don't do just what I want to do. I do what the Father says to do. He would get downloads from the Father. This is where He would disconnect from the craziness of ministry and travel and people always pulling on Him with needs. He would disconnect from just life and relationships and from people's expectations. This is where He would disconnect from. He would recharge His spiritual batteries. I think it's appropriate to say that prayer is a conversation with God, which means that prayer is listening to God also. There's one image that I've done before that I heard about a long time ago. every now and then I'll do it. And I encourage you to try it if you've never tried it. Wherever you are, if you're in your living room or your bedroom or somewhere where there's. somewhere you can sit and then there's another chair. And put it in front of you. And then as you pray, imagine that Jesus is sitting in that chair facing you. You think, oh, that's silly. , come on, it's quite an imagination. Just try it. I think it will be more impactful than you think if you've never done it. Just imagine that He's there. What is He doing? What is He saying? How is He reacting to what you're praying? Just try it. And if you want, come and tell me about it. I'd love to hear about what happens. All . I want to also give you a couple safeguards as we go along today. One is here that when it comes to hearing the voice of the Holy Spirit, there's a safeguard here. That if what you think God is saying to you, if that contradicts the revelation of God in the Bible, then it is not God. If it contradicts God's Word, it's not God. I've seen these things happen where God will say, or people will say, , God told me to do this or that. And if it's out of alignment, especially with what we see in the New Testament, then it's not of God. I remember when I was in high school, I had a friend whose mom, my friend's father had passed. the mom was remarrying. And when I met them, she was already remarried. She was newly remarried and she was super excited about it. And she said to us and to our family, God told me to marry him. God sent him to me. And the problem with that was that this guy that she had married was very much not a Christian. I mean, he was into Eastern religion. He was very much not into Christian. I mean, he was into Christian. He was very much not into Christian. I mean, he was into Christian. He was very much not into Christian. I mean, he was into Christian. He was very much not into Christian. And I remember that, and I remember that. And I remember that. But then I remember that, and I remember that. And my parents had to kind of engage this and wrestle with this. And they did a great job with them. And we took them in and loved them all and prayed for his salvation. But it never worked with them. Because the truth is, God didn't tell her to marry him. I can just say that with clarity because of what we read in Scripture. We see it even in 2 Corinthians, that Paul talks about not being unequally yoked. In other words, being lined up, being harnessed with someone as a partner that is not going the same direction you are. Someone who's not of God. That's not a Christian idea. That's not something that God just tells people to do, to marry people who are not Christian. we had to wrestle with some of that. And it wasn't just a few years later that they were at total odds with each other and got divorced. I want to say they maybe were married 5 or 6 years, but it never worked. Because they were going two different directions and it was a constant struggle from the time they were married until they weren't anymore. , it's sad that happens. It's sad that happens. It's sad that happens. It's sad that people would just say these things and attribute them to God. Number three. God speaks through His Word, the Bible. He speaks through His Holy Spirit. And He speaks through His people. Proverbs 11, 14 says, Without wise leadership, a nation falls. There is safety in having many advisors. There's safety in having many advisors. , it is wise to get the perspective of people that and that you trust. That's why for me personally, when I write something or when I just have to make a decision, especially here at the church, I talk to people. I talk to the elder team about it. Or. If I write something, I'll let our staff proofread it before it goes out. And I will tell you that has saved me a ton from making a ton of mistakes or leaving stuff out or being confusing or just putting it in someone else's hands to get their perspective has helped much. I think it's a good idea in general to have someone who can proofread your life. Not just what you would write, but. Proofreading your life. , we don't want to always just go with the first thought that comes to our mind. You've got to run it by someone. And that's also how the Lord speaks through people. As an example, let me show you in Acts 13, verse 2. Luke says, One day as these men were worshiping the Lord and fasting. Now these men, he's talking about five specific men that he mentions in verse 1. They were among the prophets and the teachers of the church there in Antioch. ? there's five men that have gathered. It says, The Holy Spirit said, Appoint Barnabas and Saul. They were two of the five that were there. For the specific work to which I have called them. And then here it is. after more fasting and prayer, the men laid their hands on them and sent them on their way. Now we read the story of Paul and Barnabas. And the missionaries. But if you rewind back to when it all started, it wasn't just that Paul woke up and said, I'm called to be a missionary to the Gentiles and I'm bringing Barnabas and we're going no matter what. No, they sat with other leaders and elders and people who had maturity and experience. And they believed that they discerned the voice of the Lord. And then they did more fasting and praying. And then they commissioned them as the church. They gave them a covering. The Holy Spirit spoke. But he did in the context of a church community. they discerned God's voice together. Remember that Jonah, he did not do that. No part in the story does he go to anybody else and ask them, Hey, I think God might have said this, but I'm thinking I might run the other way. What do you think? I think I might go to Tarshish instead. Just get away from it entirely. He didn't bounce that idea off of anybody. Of course, if he would have, they would have said, You're crazy. What did he do instead? He isolated himself. He got just with his own thoughts. And when we isolate, we are open to deception. Let me say that again. When we isolate from the body of Christ, we are open for deception from the enemy. We are vulnerable and the enemy starts licking his chops. Because the deer or the gazelle or the one that breaks away from the pack, that's the one that the. The big cat in the weeds looks at and says, That's the one we can track down. They have no protection. They have no other thoughts, no other people around to look at what they're looking at. That's how people get. Maybe you've heard the term catfished. Anybody ever heard that? Catfished, where people pretend to be someone and they go online and they act they're a young woman or something. And the man is , Oh, man. This one. This one. This woman is beautiful. And they talk for a year. And yet the whole time, it's a 62-year-old man on the other side trying to talk to him and to trick him and get money and whatever. That's being catfished. , you don't hear a lot of stories about people who are catfished that ran that by their friends and family. ? It's not the whole group was deceived. It's one person isolating and they get tricked. here's another danger. There's the danger of saying. God told me. I'm not saying we never say that. I'm just saying be careful with that phrase, God told me. Because too often what people do is use that a trump card. That you. God told me, you can't say anything. There's nothing you could say higher than that. God told me, I'm doing it. I'm just saying be careful. Because we have to put what we hear to the test. We have to put what we hear to the test. Paul tells us in 1 Corinthians. 1 Thessalonians 5.19 Do not stifle the Holy Spirit. Do not scoff at prophecies. But test everything that is said. Hold on to what is good. See, that's the balance. That we don't want to shut down the idea that God still speaks. And that He could tell you something now. But we don't just accept every thought or impression either. We test it. We could say, as a mentor of mine said one time. You eat the meat and spit out. You spit out the bones. That we test it. And some of it may not be on point. But some of it might be. we take the good. I think it's just better to have a posture of humility. Instead of saying, , God told me. Say something , I believe that God may be leading me to this. God may be leading me this way. And then invite others to help test it. Am I missing it here, guys? Am I? Is this ? Do you believe? Do you discern? This is from the Lord. I'm going to ask you to pray and help me. If you do it that way, that shows that you care more about God's will and really hearing Him. Than you do your own agenda and your own wants and desires. I know my cousin, who's married now but for a long time. She was single. And she's this wonderful woman. Beautiful lady. And she was in college. And Christian college. And she had, I know of at least one guy. Who came up to her and finally got the courage and said, I believe God told me that we're supposed to be together. And she gave the great response that I love. , when he tells me, I'll let . It's that's gold. That's perfect. You can't just throw that out there as the trump card. here's the safeguard with hearing with God speaking through his people. Is that make sure that you value the voice of mature believers. That you value the voices around you. Don't be foolish and think, , that's that happens to other people, but not to me. if the mature Christians in your life are waving red flags about what you think God is saying. You got to slow down and you got to listen because God often confirms his voice through his people. for example, if you believe that God is telling you that you're going to be a missionary. You're called to be a missionary. You're called to be a missionary overseas. What you don't do is you just go the next day and buy a plane ticket and get a brand new suitcase for travel. That's the wrong move. First, ask some important questions , hey, does this what I believe God's telling me? Does it line up with scripture? , , the Great Commission says go into all the world and make disciples of all nations. , it lines up with scripture. , then ask yourself, do I have peace from the Holy Spirit about this specific calling? Is I rest wrestle with it and discern. And test it. Does it sit within me or do I have this uneasy churning? No peace. And if you do have peace, then you bring it to others. Bring it to church leadership. For example, the hope is that they would affirm what you're hearing that they would agree with this calling on your life. But if they have some concerns or they suggest some steps or some prerequisites first should probably listen to them. You should probably follow their guidance. God speaks through his people and this applies to anything that you believe God is telling you. It's really a picture of how to hear God's voice in a healthy way. It's not having a lack of faith or a lack of courage by listening to others. And , just don't give in you. God told you no, it's being wise. the key is to be humble. It's to be biblical and it's to be involved in a solid community of faith. And then be ready to obey when God opens the door when he says now be ready to move. And that leads us to our last one. We'll just take a few more extra minutes here. Number four is that God speaks through our circumstances. God speaks through our circumstances. Romans 8 28. Many of , it says that we know that God causes everything or some translation say all things to work together for the good of those who love God and are called according to his purpose for them. Jonah experienced this firsthand. God used things in his life a storm a crew of some pretty unhappy sailors. And then he used a giant fish to redirect Jonas path. And then later in the story, if you remember he used the plant and he used a worm and he used a really hot East wind to also affect Jonah and to teach him about his mercy. We see it in the Apostle Paul's life to an act 16 verse 6. It says, next, Paul and Silas traveled through the area of Phrygia and Galatia because the Holy Spirit had prevented them from preaching the word in the province of Asia at that time. Circumstances, the Lord wouldn't let him verse 7 then coming to the borders of my Sia. They headed north for the province of Bithynia. But again, the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them to go there. they're traveling West and then they want to go south towards what it's all happening in the. For in Turkey and modern-day Turkey and they want to kind of go south towards Asia Minor and the Lord doesn't let him. We don't know the circumstance. then they keep going and they stop and they minister and then they want to go north to Bethany or to my Sia for Bethany. , and the Lord doesn't let him go there either. And then there's a whole situation that unravels later. That is very clear why the Lord didn't want him to go to those other places. He had a third place in mind that was really important for them to go to. the circumstances didn't line up and wondering what's going on. But Paul has a vision of this man from Macedonia who's asking for help and they need to go there and it became clear. This is God's path. This is what he wants. here's a safeguard here when it comes to God speaking through our circumstances. Don't base decisions solely on whether a door is open or closed. Not only whether a door is open or closed because God. Can use circumstances to reinforce what he's already saying through his word or through his spirit or through his people. Just because a door may be open. It sounds a good idea. It might not be a God idea. It might be settling for something less than what God has. , sometimes we have a closed door and we think all the enemies attacking when it might be the spirit of God closing that door. Other times we have an open door and we think oh God is wanting me to walk through the door. We just assume but it could be the enemy trying to steer us off course into something that we don't need to be a part of. don't base your decisions solely on whether it's an easy door to walk through or not. God works in different ways. here's a simple test that we can use and maybe if there's something to remember or something sticky today that you can take away. This maybe is it if we want to discern God's voice. We look at scripture, his spirit, the Saints, and if it makes sense. first thing is scripture. Does it line up with the Bible? What I believe I'm hearing line up. The spirit. Do I have a sense of godly peace about it? And then the Saints. We don't usually call ourselves Saints, but we'll take it. Do other believers affirm it? And then sense wisdom. Does it reflect God's character and wisdom? Or, is this out of alignment with who God is and what he does in his revelation in scripture? But if it passes this test, then we can move forward confidently in faith that the Lord is speaking. we really do believe that God is speaking today that he speaks through his word through his spirit speaks through his people. And he speaks through his Providence over the circumstances that we face that we might find ourselves in even today. the real question is not does God speak? The real question. Is am I listening to God? Am I willing to listen and to obey what he says? Share one last thing with you before we go. This is it's home practically and physically in my family because of my dad's hearing problem. He's totally deaf. he's had a cochlear implant installed in his ear and that's helped him be able to hear sometimes in a crowded environment. It's still hard for him, but he, he can hear but I'll tell you it's it's many years of frustration of having to talk at an insanely loud level for him to just hear anything that I would say when he takes his cochlear off. We could all stand together and scream at the top of our lungs. He wouldn't hear it. we could be super loud and it just continues to paint a picture in my own life of the voice of God where every time I have to be loud with my dad for him to hear me. The Lord's , hey, make sure you're listening to me because you see how this works. You see how frustrating that is that I'm speaking to you and I'm being loud, but you're you don't have your hearing aid on you don't have you're not really listening to me. You're distracted and you're not praying. You're just coming and talk talk to me and telling me all these things. But if you put the device in put the time and say Holy Spirit, I'm going to pause here. I'm going to create space for you. I'm going to put it in and you might know. This the still small voice of the Holy Spirit when that happens, but we've got to be willing to listen. It's not that God's not speaking. It's that we are not listening to his voice. Jonah he heard God and he ran. What about you? This week. I want to challenge you to take some time in his word and invite the Holy Spirit to speak to you jump in our Bible reading plan. This week. If you don't know about it, see someone in the back will get you connected to it. We're reading the Bible in 2025. And then when you invite the Lord in you take time in his word and then share this with the believer that you trust share it with somebody. Share what you sense God might be saying to you and then just pray that simple prayer Lord. Give me the ears to hear and a heart to obey. Give me the ears to hear and a heart to obey. Let's close in prayer. Would you stand? And I'm going to give you that opportunity to just pray that prayer. Lord. I know you're speaking and I want to listen. give me the ears to hear and the heart to obey. Would you do some with me? Would you just put your hands next to your ears this? Lord, give me the ears to hear. Just say that. Lord, give me the ears to hear and I'll put them over your heart and give me the heart to obey. Let's say it together. Give me the heart to obey. Lord. We know you're speaking and we want we want to find you. We want to seek you with all our heart. We want to know what you're telling us. We want to know what you're telling your people in your church in this day where the world around us is dark. And evil is on the move. We want to hear you and be able to discern you. make it clear. However, you see fit. Even if it be in a dream or speak to us somehow. Pray for Revelation to come to each one each one those that are here those that are online those that are watching this after the fact that a revelation of Jesus would come. As we turn to you in Jesus name. Amen. Amen. May the Lord bless you and keep you and make his face shine on you and be gracious to you and give you peace. May you be a light in the darkness. Thank you. God bless you. Thank you for sticking around a couple extra minutes with me today. Have a great week. Go Steelers.