Here are 11 oddly specific childhood trauma issues. You might be a little bit freaked out about how applicable these are to you because you've probably thought that these only are unique to you, but they're actually pretty common for childhood trauma. Here's how I'll format this video real quick. I'm going to talk about the examples of each issue, how they might come from childhood trauma, and finally some treatment recommendations on how to really rethink them or what to kind of do about them. let's just get into it. Here you go. You might feel an impact from some of these, but just to let , I see these as really normal reactions, normal things that we have going on for growing up in an abnormal development. number one is something that I call emotional delay. Emotional delay is when an emotion about something takes several hours or even a day to catch up with you. there's the event, then there's you in the present, and then there's the emotions kind of catching up to you in the present. Let's say your boss or your partner asks something of you in the moment, and in that moment, you just kind of automatically said yes. And the day goes on and that kind of a thing. And then gradually you start to feel a pain of anger or a little bit of an escalation. And finally, the emotion is , wait a minute, was I just taken advantage of? Could be a situation that, or it could be you see something ugly earlier in the day between other people, and then later it catches up with you, something you see on the street. Or someone tells you that they can't. Can't make a commitment that they committed to you. And then you're in the moment, you're , don't worry about it. It's fine. And then later you feel really let down, really disappointed. This feels kind of an escalation of emotion that you weren't in touch with at the time of the event earlier in the day. And it just simply catches up to you. I mentioned, you'll really know about this if you've ever gotten a rush of buildup of emotion that you can't quite place and then realize it was about that interaction earlier. How this might come from childhood trauma. I believe that these delays are really due to the childhood trauma issues of dissociation and hypervigilance. Childhood trauma survivors struggle with not fully being in their body and not being present in their emotions in real time. We tend to live in a cerebral kind of anxious place and a thinking place of, and maybe that's where they're quickly saying yes to things because we live in a little bit of an emergency, which will be on another issue coming up later. It might be due to that kind of energy we have. The hypervigilance, I believe, is when our inner child kind of goes, wait a minute, , this, was I just taken advantage of or was I just let down again? Or perhaps some anger and sadness comes up later. , kids growing up in childhood trauma leave their emotional body. They go up into their heads and watch out for what the adults are doing or what the adults need. And we're not attuned with ourselves and what we have going on in real time in our childhood, what we need emotionally. We can trace an example of dissociations and hypervigilance, say, if you grew up in domestic violence. And let's just say there's a fight on a Tuesday night and on Wednesday you wake up and then the worry about the other parent really starts to catches up with you as you go to school. That's an example of where this stuff isn't in real time because during the fight on that Tuesday night, the child is too busy being freaked out about safety or just the charge of it. , they're not even thinking. They're just kind of frozen. some treatment recommendations for this. Practice discussing emotions when they come up with safe people. And I know the intimacy of that is kind of scary, but that's our way out of this. Another recommendation is know that when it happens that it's your inner child catching up to the event that happened earlier after kind of living underground because maybe you're in a baseline other trauma response, just living in emergency. Start to explore. Some daily inner child dialoguing, which is journaling with your inner child. It's not just regular dialoguing. It's dialoguing between your non dominant hand and dominant hand. I'm going to be referencing this a lot in this video about what they're feeling in the day to day. It's almost the idea is to become a good parent for yourself and really become aware of what is going on with you, which is a process in the day to day. Another is to join a group or find a therapist if you can or join a community such as a support group, say Al-Anon or some kind of 12 step. I know that those are complicated for a lot of people and start to practice discussing how you feel in the in the moment around some safe people in 12 step. I learned how to truly where I learned how to publicly speak and catch up with my emotions in addition to the group therapy that I went in. we should all be getting this stuff from our families, but we simply don't. Moving on to number two, which is what I call rushing nowhere, rushing nowhere or rushing through life, as I believe, is due to living in an emergency due to. In childhood, we really live that way. Some examples you ever catch yourself walking too fast for no really reason, you're in a rush somewhere. Ever jump into basic things you're now on a mission to get it done, securing movie tickets or something that, a reservation or something. Ever find yourself treating basic things life or death situations. You might see this in others and be , Whoa, where's the fire? what is going on there? This may look very different. For. Those who identify as being neurodivergent, just FYI. not everything is universal in terms of applying. this can look you just got a master's degree and now you feel the immediate need to get your doctorate or get a new kind of thing or get the spouse or get the house and get the baby. It's a hurry up and reach, , the elder years super fast. That's kind of an one example of rushing or this can look unconsciously going fast in life. Over small things where you kind of realize that you have zero chill in life. You're very much Johnny on the spot on top of things that you really don't know how to slow down. Another issue is having too much chill, and that's maybe for another video where it's kind of not really related to this, but just the other side of it. where this might come from in childhood, shame and hyper vigilance can make us rush. Imagine growing up in something alcoholism or a secretive family or a fundamentalist. , a fundamentally religious family where one false step that you make can have terrible consequences for you or others. when things come up, we're on it. , I see many clients, including myself, rushing through life or are used to in living in an emergency because they're running from the possibility of making mistakes and looking bad or having others kind of see us as defective or chaotic the families we come from. Something imposter syndrome. . . Or that could be a root of imposter syndrome. The rushing can also involve unconsciously covering something up, trying to prevent a disaster that isn't really real, but it was real in our childhood. we do need to have some compassion for ourselves. And a funny example of this, as a northerner from the U.S., and there was a storm in 1978 called the blizzard of 78. And there was where we got snowed in for a week and people ran out of food and they would have to take sleds and go down to the low end. And they would have to go down to the local quickie mart and, , get bread and milk. there's this joke about getting bread and milk. But still in New England, the minute it starts snowing, that people have this emergency reaction , I got to get the bread and milk. It's kind of an example of that rushing where that storm was 40 years ago when we generally don't run out of food up there. But that's still kind of ingrained. some treatment recommendations in this one. Working with our inner child on really slowing down. Another is dialoguing and journaling with our inner child about those emergencies. That don't really exist, but they did exist in childhood. And simply asking our inner child on paper, what do you think is going to happen if we don't get to the appointment early or on time? What's the fear about? Another is finding ways for you to work on turning down your internal motor, turning down that emergent living. About doing things such as yoga, meditation, breathwork. Things mindfulness. All the stuff that you've heard before. Those things don't cure trauma or really treat trauma, but they do help us slow down. Moving on to number three. This one is really interesting and really unique to me. It's something that I call refrigerator buzz depression. The issue is you don't notice that you're depressed because you've maybe been that way since early childhood. , with a refrigerator that buzzes, you might have had this refrigerator for years and you're , one day you're , what's that sound? Has that always been buzzing that? What's that depression? Oh my God. Have I had that? This thing? It's long. some examples, I just said, you might just kind of wake up to it one day and notice it. Or friends might be , , I don't really live that in that kind of really shut down lethargic. And it isn't part of my everyday life. Is it that for you? you might get a reference point from there. And again, growing up in it, we don't have a reference point because we're just in the trauma where it might come from in childhood trauma. It might come from not getting any help as a child and processing emotions that they come up whether that's you're bullied at school. Or a pet dies. there's just really an emotionally vacant family system. Could be a backlog of childhood situations and dynamics that caused you to shut down but are still there needing to be processed. Just simply our parents' marriage is enough. Alcoholism, death in the family, medical trauma, hating your oppressive father, feeling nothing would change, kind of a hopelessness going on in the first 20 years of our life. And being depressed is actually a natural. It's a natural. It's actually a natural protective mechanism growing up and when we're growing up and all that. But now as adults, we're still wrestling through it's still with us. some treatment ideas for refrigerator buzz depression. I was able to get out of this being in a trauma group where one member simply said that I was a good person and I didn't have to really be anxious or weird or people pleasing in group. , I had never heard that I was a good person before and it had a huge shift and impact on me. Because the trauma core belief really got hit deep and was kind of taken out. Now I had a new belief that I was a good person. that's one part of how good psychotherapy group psychotherapy can help with that stuff. Being connected with good people and processing your family of origin trauma is helpful. There are really no real life hacks for depression. You can't really journal your way through it. You can't downward dog your way through it. But I do believe that processing what happened to us also helped me. This is a good example. I'm a really good school teacher. I'm a great teacher. us is a crucial step in sort of treating it. Treatment will involve awakening to how bad it was. And of course you struggle with depression, but that's what it was specifically for you, a core belief that things will never get better and I'm just awful, which is really essentially what I felt. And as a side note, when you start processing your childhood trauma, depressive symptoms kind of get worse in the beginning. just be aware of that. And it's the therapy at the time. Moving on related to depression is something that I'm called being tired as a trigger. This one's really not too complicated. It simply means that we confuse our natural body's reaction to being tired for depression or failing. it's a getting tired is a bummer for us. Childhood trauma survivors can be addicted to productivity or being on a mission. There's lots of overlap here with ADHD as another reminder of that. And we can confuse being tired for failing, not being good enough. Or it's again a feeling we might be abandoned if we're not up or something that. where this might come from childhood trauma, neglected kids get attached to coping and they aren't parented around basic things going to bed or taking care of themselves. We can unconsciously also associate with going to bed to being alone or being abandoned. going to bed was when we really felt the most disconnected in our day. Being tired can trigger us to feeling sad. we try to keep the party going a little bit. anytime that we're, anytime we come back into our body and being tired will do that, we might get triggered to that because now we're going to have to feel things. Another is the hypervigilant trauma brain does not rest because we can't be vigilant when we're resting. Another idea is the inner child might fear of missing out or FOMO about kind of going to bed or being tired. some treatment ideas on this one. It's really simple is to connect with your inner child. again with this dialoguing tool and ask them why getting tired might be a bummer for them. What does it mean? What are they feel they're missing out on? What is it? Does it make them feel a little bit sad or disconnected? in the inner adult can do some work around better sleep hygiene, such as doing some somatic mindfulness around reclaiming the idea that being tired is such an and natural thing. And it's about our body communicating with us. While the trauma brain is stepping in to say, oh, no, it's not about it's about something else. I don't want to I don't want to feel tired. Moving on to number five is something that I call chameleon, but don't mix certain friends can't know about certain friends. This one isn't just about being a chameleon where we can change vibes and personas to fit in. I remember in high school, I can I could hang out with the jocks or the burnouts or the nerds and be part of them and switch gears and kind of, , adapt to the whatever social situation. I just really think it's many of us kind of can do that growing up in childhood trauma because we don't really have our own authentic sense of self. we can just take on a whole bunch of personas. It's a skill of adapting but we struggle with knowing what our real identity is, to not being able to develop one in safety other healthy kids might be able to do that. an added layer to this is not mixing for some reason we have issues around. co-workers that we not meeting our outside friends. we tend to compartmentalize a little bit or there's something going on there. This one may not be unique to you. This one is very specific. It might come from trauma in the following ways. Many of us hid our home life and the hiding of our family or original group was happening really early. We might be hiding about intimate secrets and things my dad. My dad works for the government when the reality is your dad works at a sewage treatment plant and you're hiding some kind of reality there. Parents could model similar things around not mixing because of their own shame or their own hiding. Another idea is that mixing could have had terrible consequences for kids in the divorce and they pick up on all the energy going around in the bigger family system about going to grandmas who now trash talks mom or something that. And surviving trauma can be about keeping things separate to not hear criticism. that might be some reasons. some treatment ideas for chameleon but don't mix. Start to take some risk and simply introduce others to each other if you have different friend circles. Dialogue again with the inner child and walk through what the fear of what is going to happen if this person knows that person. How could things go wrong according to them? And embrace the idea that there's safety in adulthood that people can make their own choices about vibing with each other or not being able to do that. Moving on to number six. This one is a big one. Something that I call on the spot dissociation. Being on the spot involves everything from speaking at a work event to being simply asked a question or by a friend that might be a little bit intimate or even not. Could be just a simple honest question. Having attention on us and giving a response to that attention or presenting feels an attack and we might leave our bodies or we're in danger. Not just being shy. It's not about just I mean that can be a two or cannot. It's not just about being nervous. This is really when we check out when we're on the spot. This can happen in tiny ways simply a friend asking oh hey what happened with that person you're dating to having to present a PowerPoint presentation in a meeting and you have an anxiety attack and lose your words. Another common one is being on the spot is when you think about what happens to you when someone sings happy birthday to you and the family your partner. And you're oh my gosh I'm sorry I didn't work getting all that attention can really make us feel freaked out. I mean it's I don't think it's ever comfortable I think if you're super comfortable. It's a little bit weird. Maybe it's cool if you're three or four years old or if you're five but it's always just oh God please finish a song. But for others it can be an extreme trigger about being the focus in that way and it can feel excruciating. And it's funny I joke with people I'm a musician I play multiple instruments and stuff that but there's this joke to say I'm a pretty good musician until you put a mic in front of me. That's another example of being on the spot. Where this might come from in childhood trauma. This amazing psychologist named Irving Yalom talks to these psychiatrists I believe actually talks about how we only usually experientially talk to a child in this way. Look at me when I'm talking to you. Look at me when I'm talking to you. We only tend to do that if we're abusive and we only tend to do that to children. That's an extreme version of when we're on the spot. And many of you may have really grown up with that finger in your face. What did you do. But I would that aggression. Hyper abusive hypercritical. That's a big example of where this stuff might come from. It might come from not having a safe person in early life where when you think about being securely attached and children needing a lot of help you're in daycare and there's a play date and you're just dropped off instead of having a safe person that you can help with all that focus. With all that newness I hopefully I'm making sense here but children need a lot of hand holding in that way. But many of us are neglected that we're just dropped off first day of kindergarten and picked up and not even asked how it was and we're terrified the whole time that the terror is we're on the spot. We have to talk to the adults. Adults can be terrifying especially if you're struggling with shame and if you're really neglected. Another example where it might come from is not being given any space in the family. I'm not sure. Having parents who are terrified themselves about being seen they may maybe they have extreme neurotic stuff about being in a picture or something looking bad in some way. And there could be a lack of safety being visible while expressing emotions and this feeling we're in trouble if we're emotional or if we have to present or if we have to talk some treatment recommendations for this one with the others. Find safe people to talk about emotions in real time. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. The crawl Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. Increase. just getting more and more comfortable. And lastly, dialogue with the inner child, again, about what is gonna happen if we make ourselves seen or we have to present or what happens to us when we are the focus. Talking to them about specific examples of being on the spot at home growing up is gonna be helpful too. Moving on to number seven is what I call laughing about the pain. This is a subtle social issue that comes up when we're expressing a bit of ourselves or a bit of our story. What this looks is when we jokingly talk about our abusive or horrific childhood situations in kind of an overly casual or kind of funny way. You'll know when this happens when others are , whoa, you ? While the survivor isn't fully connected with the severity about what they're talking about. Essentially, they're not taking themselves seriously because that's a thing. And I think our inner child pops up in these situations and starts to talk about the pain and tell the truth about what happened to us, which comes out sideways, which is another thing on the list. We don't know how to take the truth about what happened to us seriously because no one else did again. Some examples, when we might be kind of saying , , , they dropped me off at college, but didn't tell me they didn't pay for any of it and I had to sleep in a dorm hallway for four days and they wouldn't return my calls. Ha. Or, , my mom dropped me off at my uncle's for babysitting telling me to not go into the bathroom alone with him. Isn't that wild? There's a charge to the way that we're being treated. There's a charge to the way that we're being treated. There's a charge to the way that we're being treated. And we're kind of that kind of expression and we are uncontrollably kind of bringing humor into it because I think we don't really know how to feel about it or how to talk about it otherwise. Where this might come from. I find this one to be of growing up in a highly toxic family wrapped up in some extreme neglect. That tends to be in my mind when I see a client doing this. And I think it can also come from, I was doing this as . I think it can also come from growing up in a highly caustic or sarcastic family, the anti-love family from my seven types of toxic family systems, where there's really kind of a nastiness to the day-to-day life, , where the family scoffs at emotional experiences and looks for opportunities to make fun of emotions, make fun of kids, make fun of vulnerability. It's really quite gross when you really think about it. Or parents could live in a sort of F my life kind of existence and they don't take themselves seriously as . some treatment recommendations. Be mindful of this tendency when we do this, because when we do this, we don't walk away feeling good about ourselves either. We just kind of go , oh, that was a little bit awkward or that was a little bit weird. Try to look at it as a symptom from your family of origin, abuse. Start talking about what happened to you a bit more seriously. No one benefits from making fun of your story, especially you. It actually creates distance when we do this. Find some supportive people. Find some supportive people where you can practice discussing your emotions in real time and learn how to actually feel the anger or feel the grief instead of just kind of making fun of how bad it was. Moving on to number eight, which is something that I'm simply calling crying valve. Crying valve is, this one is pretty simple. Either you can't cry or you can't stop crying. You can often think about childhood trauma on a spectrum. I do this with many of these concepts where the goal is somewhat heading towards the middle, where the goal is somewhat heading towards the middle, where the goal is somewhat heading towards the middle, and to become more balanced in these things. Extreme left on the spectrum, whichever your left or is, extreme left on the spectrum is being shut down and they can't access grief. And extreme is the emotional eruption, think volcano of hopelessness and overwhelm, which isn't exactly processing grief either. Examples, going into therapy and feeling really on the spot and not knowing what to do about the grief because that feeling is missing. It's missing from your insides. Same with the possible big situations a wake or a funeral and you're not feeling anything. You're not a sociopath, it's just a symptom of trauma. Going to therapy, now the other side of this is going to therapy and you can't stop crying in front of the therapist and you can't get, kind of get it together to have the discussion or you can't regulate. I'm not criticizing you. These are just common childhood trauma symptoms. Where this might come from, every child has their own strategy growing up in childhood. Some really leave their emotional body in an extreme way and shut down to the numbness, which is a really good strategy. And some kids go to a survival strategy of cry for help. They, and they kind of can live in that in adulthood. The adult who is overwhelmed with crying, the upset might be about crying for help more than it is about the feelings underneath. it's a little bit complicated. It's almost there's the grief down here, but then there's the cry for help. And that's the cry for help strategy, I think up here. Some treatment is I really think EMDR is very helpful for any of these. EMDR can be helpful for both presentations. DBT is somewhat helpful for the emotional regulation skills, but it's not trauma work. I want to be clear about that. Might be a good step to do, but DBT might be a good step to do before doing some trauma work. Finding support where you can talk about the stuckness or the numbness or work with the trauma, work with a therapist who can help you talk about the abuse while staying present and not going into the overwhelm or not going into the shutdown about it. Dialoguing with the inner child and ask them what happens when you try to cry or process when something overwhelming comes up to figure out what they might need from you, the inner adult. Or there might be a belief going on about the shutdown, about not crying that might be, , just boys don't cry or something. It could be something as simple as, , crying. , just boys don't cry or something. It could be something as simple as that. Or it's just really being removed from our emotional experience as a little person. Another is looking at both extremes as standard trauma issues and that really I want you to take this in your, it's not about being defective in any way. It's just standard what happens to kids when they don't grow up in safety. Moving on to number nine, this one's interesting. Something that I call glass frog. They can all see through me. Glass frog is something simply that I made up. It's a species of frog. It's a body that is completely transparent and you can see all their organs. And it made me think of childhood trauma survivors myself who struggle with shame and hypervigilance. The idea is the feeling of being completely transparent when you are social, when you're around others. you go to a coffee shop and it feels they all had a meeting before you got there about how you, about you, about how you're a loser, how you suck. This is what I would experience when I would go. This wasn't exactly conscious. It was just feeling they were just , it was feeling being raw. It was just , it was feeling being raw. And exposed. This can feel refrigerator buzz depression where you might not be fully conscious you have this going on until you kind of wake up to it. , it feels being totally exposed to the world and everyone at work knows that you're this or you're that, or you're late, or you had a fight with your partner or your tank is on empty or whatever, or your car's a mess. Shame, hypervigilance. The hypervigilance is being focused on what other people think. Where it comes from. Again, major off things are happening at home for the child. Developmentally, I'm fascinated by this. They think the teacher might know that mom's an alcoholic or that dad punches walls. It's almost, I think it's almost wrapped up in a little bit of early object relations about thinking. Children think the adults are almost omnipotent and they, , when you make a mistake in the bathroom in kindergarten, it's almost you almost unconsciously assume that other people already know. Shame and hypervigilance. And related to that, abused kids have to come up with strategies of hiding what is going on with them. And think about it. If you've ever tried to sneak into a job after you, because you're 30 minutes late, because you're having a bad morning, that sneaking feeling might've been something you've been doing your whole life, hoping that you're not gonna be put on the spot, all of those things. Because we were vulnerable. We were, it was pretty transparent. Another examples of this is having to hide how fundamentally, religious your family was around others who were not having to pretend or mask your vulnerability due to being abused at home. Having insane hypercritical abusive parents where you had to hide that you watched a cartoon at a friend's house when you weren't supposed to, or you maybe you asked for seconds and you're worried about at the friend's house. And maybe your parents are gonna find out and shame you about that. It's feeling you're already in trouble with the world and you have no defense or anonymity, which isn't true. , some treatment ideas for this one. If you can visualize a bubble or force field around you when you go to the coffee shop for now, or anywhere socially, and that bubble is about your own autonomy and your own anonymity. Another is that people, related to that, people don't have to, people don't know where you come from. People don't know what's going on with you. And it's really none of their business, but your inner child thinks that they might. And besides these folks, they're way too busy worrying about their own problems in their own lives to be worried about the fact that we had two pop tarts for breakfast and we're a mess or whatever, . Another treatment idea is working with a supportive person or a group therapist on naming the shame that comes up for you around this. Dialoguing with our inner child, again, about specifically reparenting them on the idea that what do they think people think about them? If you can nail that, you're really gonna know what's going on with a lot of your triggers and your problems, because there's some, there's some things that you can do that are really the root to this glass frog issue. Number 10, we're almost close to the end here. What I call sideways grief or rage. You're probably familiar with this one. Emotional, kind of sappy commercials that come up, seeing kids get what they need in their own childhood, when you're out and about, seeing happy couples. You may have some grief or big chunks of sadness that kind of comes out sideways. Or rage, where you lose it over small things, because you're struggling with much bigger things, that you're maybe not able to handle. Or maybe you're not in tune with. , these are the low, we didn't realize how low threshold we were until we couldn't open the piece of mail or something that. When we are repressing trauma or we're putting issues down, stuff comes out sideways. I'm a visual person, when you're repressing how bad your parents' marriage was and how bad your childhood was, comes out sideways when you maybe see a healthy couple, or, and you might just say, oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I just start sobbing and not being able to relate to two things. Where it comes from in childhood. Really, my mentor, Amanda Curtin, talks about this reserve , a literal in us of pain, grief, all the situations that are still unprocessed that happen to us. It's really what we're struggling with this . And it pops up, it comes out sideways when we get triggered. Could also come from really the unfairness of that step-parent that's never been addressed, that your other parent never protected you from. That's never been addressed, that your other parent never protected you from. That's never been addressed, that your other parent never protected you from. Rage can come out sideways from that kind of a thing, when you see people kind of getting the shaft or not being protected. The offness of being a parentified child. You're at work and the rage might come out sideways if someone asked you to bring something to a Yankee swap or something that. That's where this stuff comes from. The pain of not being in a sane and connecting, loving family. That's where those sappy commercials about grandma, they pick grandma up in a snowstorm because they want to have things. They want to have things for Thanksgiving when everyone's , oh my god. triggering because we never saw that kind of the caring in our own family systems. And as a side note, the sideways stuff is, if you struggle with remembering the issues around your childhood, this is where that phrase, your body remembers. Your body remembers in the way that things come out sideways. it's really important to pay attention to them, those are your clues. Some treatment ideas is finding safe people to start processing, not just talking about what happened, processing in it with a therapist or with a group if you can get one if you can find one i know that's loaded start making some notes in your phone about when it comes up when things start to come out sideways and why when you saw pets not being cared for when you're seeing a family being supportive of each other and trying they're doing that seamlessly another is or another example is when you can't handle minor frustrations trying to find a parking spot and you just can't and it's you have a rage meltdown kind of a thing tells you have some other stuff kind of going on and it's coming out sideways in that moment another treatment idea is dialoguing and journaling can be really helpful to be more in touch with what you have going on in the present and look at that as a bump say with your partner as opposed to having these sideways reactions and you're where did that come from to try to really know what is going on with you in real time before things blow up sideways if you can and it's not just that last bit it's really that of grief and pain that i mentioned as not being connected with what's going on in our present lives and last one coming in last is something that is this one's very important something that i call waiting games i will do x after y takes place waiting games is also known as mood dependent behavior some examples this was me i'll quit smoking once i get a gym membership i'll leave this relationship once i feel i can make it on my own i'll give them another chance and see and then you're on chance number 89 with an abusive person i'll go to therapy once i'm sure i have issues that i'll have to talk about it's there's this really it's game it's kind of game playing that we do with ourselves children are this developmentally we come up with these strategies to kind of avoid pain but we stay unfortunately in that undeveloped mindset as adults waiting games are a little bit more of a fun game to play are really evidence of being in our inner child who is very accustomed to waiting for things to get better on their own without really taking any action. As a side note, that's my favorite definition for a codependent person. Someone who doesn't take any action is just waiting for things to get better. Don't take that as criticism. I hope it was just very helpful about that definition. Think stuckness. have you ever played these kind of waiting games with yourself? even things , I'm going to get going in my day after I get some energy and then you end up just doom scrolling until it hits kind of critical mass. Those are terrible, awful stuck places that feel impossible to get some movement on. I've been there. And this is in the overlap with ADHD and it should be noted to that. But this is really the childhood trauma part that I'm discussing that could lead to struggling with waiting games. Where it comes from. Having parents who lived in this most of their lives, they were very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, my parent, my mother specifically lived in this kind of, I will do X after Y when things get better. Could simply come from not being parented. a child doesn't do their homework and it's 11 PM and they're tired. They're going to go to bed and they think, I know I'll get up early and do my homework then. But they don't operate on an alarm clock kind of a thing. That kind of level of neglect and not being parented can give us these magical thinking, which is what waiting games kind of are. Experiencing emotional abuse in childhood where you're taught that, you're not good at getting anything done. Or you believe that because you're neglected and you're overwhelmed. Or you're emotionally shamed for being an F up child. Or you're hearing things , who do you think you are that you can make those band tryouts kind of stuff. all that garbage is essentially being shot down before you even start. we play these games about, because we don't have enough gas in the tank because of all that emotional abuse. some treatment ideas. Being more and more aware of how your inner child believes that change only comes from being in the mood or having the energy at the time, which is false. The inner adult taking over gently and just starting to try to do things while feeling literally poop about it. the energy comes from doing the thing after, not before. And if you can get to group therapy, individual therapy, if that's available to you and start examining about how you were parented around things bed time, sleep time, sleep time, sleep time, sleep time, sleep time, sleep time, sleep time, sleep time, sleep time, sleep time. Limits, sugar, getting things done. Age appropriate tasks for your development. some final thoughts on this. These are just my ideas of what I saw in myself and what I see in my clients. I've named these things and how they kind of make sense to me. Others may have different names from them. It's totally . There's a lot of overlap in ADHD and ASD world, such as especially things the glass frog thing or rushing. Here, I'm trying to get to the point. I'm trying to talking about these things and how they relate to not growing up in safety in the toxic family system, but both things can very much be true. Both sets of symptoms from different types of diagnoses can be true as . I mentioned dialoguing quite a bit. You can grab an e-course here, up here, or you can join my monthly healing community, which is included in that too, and try to work on these issues of dominant hand, non-dominant hand, writing on paper, and really starting to parent our inner adult in that way. I liken that exercise to EMDR because we are getting bilateral stimulation between the hemispheres, which helps us soothe, and it helps us develop a stronger relationship with our inner child and gets our adult in place. It's really my favorite tool that I use. You can grab it all up there. These issues are not forever, and they are not set in stone. As I still grow and change, I don't struggle with these symptoms anymore, but they used to really run me. And they used to really freak me out. just know that they're really normal reactions to an abnormal family abuse, and the more that you work on yourself, the less power these things will have over you. I hope that was helpful, and as always, may you be filled with loving kindness, may you be , may you be peaceful and at ease, and may you be joyous. And I will see you next time. Thank you. Thank you.