It's very hard to define trauma in a way. Is it external? Is it internal? Is it the event? Is it the reaction? But basically, the way I to say it, it's something that overwhelms your capacity to cope and nobody else takes over for you at a particular point. , and then you get stuck. And your whole central nervous system continues to experience the ongoing world through the lens of that particular overwhelming experience. you continue to be constantly scared or feel people are going to attack you or feeling you're going to be left for dead. And you continue to react to oftentimes fairly trivial challenges as if it is a catastrophe. And it's really the ongoing reaction that really defines what trauma is about. It's that your mind and your brain gets changed by trauma and then from then on, you live in this traumatic, internal world. the trauma lives inside of you, basically. In the country in which you now live and practice, the United States, do , do we know how prevalent trauma is? Is it even possible to measure it? , there's things you can measure. Incidents of domestic violence. In the US, it's about one out of three couples engages in domestic violence. One out of three? . And probably in the UK, it would be similar. Can we just pause there a minute? That is a staggering amount. , I think every relationship is a miracle. , to put up with each other, we drive each other a little bit crazy. For people to actually get along and live close together and having to make adjustments with each other is a very complex thing. But it takes a fair amount of maturity actually and being able to understand other people's point of view. I think it is precious for us to be able to understand what we're going through. It's precious for people to be able to get along with each other. And oftentimes they don't. . And let's take it away from domestic violence for a minute. . This is an idea I've been really playing around with, and it's kind of, is it external, is it internal? . An external event happens. The same external event could happen to 100 people, and 100 people are not all going to have the same response. Some people will be able to manage it, some people will be able to manage that better. Some people, I'm guessing, may not be traumatized from the same incident. if our responses are individual to external events, is it easy for us to see how prevalent trauma is in society? Because on one level trauma, whether an event is traumatic or not, actually depends on how we perceive it and our internal response. Not only how we perceive it, but how our personal or router's perceive it. you may look a very put together person, and people say they clearly didn't get affected by the particular incident. But basically I to say, you don't know somebody until you marry them for some length of time. , we all have our personas. . And somebody may be calm and brilliant under certain situations, and something minor happens, and they blow up. But we may never get to see that. it's very hard to know as an outsider who has survived the trauma and to what degree people have. And in my world, they say, oh, some people are resilient. Really? Are you sure? , how do people wake up with diapers? Or do they actually freeze in front of their children and become all uptight and don't respond to their kids' needs? That wouldn't be rated as being a trauma. They're not being post-traumatic. Just, I saw that all the time in many of my patients, particularly my German patients. They all had these traumatized parents, and that was very quiet. A household. nobody ever talked, nobody talked about anything. People worked all the time, and there was this pall of dead iciness over the family. You wouldn't rate that as traumatic because nobody blows up at anybody. . point which i want to come to which is how different cultures deal with trauma or don't deal with trauma before we get to that though i have been constantly amazed by how many people say they've had happy safe secure childhoods and when you go a little bit deeper and just probe a little bit it's not always the case and i feel that humans have a remarkable capacity to bury stuff and get on with their life it's still there absolutely they haven't dealt with it but they tell themselves a story that my childhood was great everything was fine my parents love me could you with all your experience outline some common signs of trauma for one thing the family you come from defines who you are if you said tell people my family was really messed up and violent then you tell people i'm a messed up person and you own that and it becomes a source of shame you try to kill the lily and people generally do that they try to make things pretty i don't know how common it is for people to have perfectly happy childhoods i know a few people but not in the mental health field what are the various qualities that define a healthy non-traumatic childhood warmth usually a lot of food a lot of music but people being attuned to each other people spending a lot of time with each other having time for each other not hiding themselves behind screens or workaholism or whatever it does happen and people who do things together they're pleasurable and interesting yes it happens for someone who's listening who thinks i don't think i had a traumatic childhood or i don't think i'm suffering from any trauma what are common signs that might indicate trauma people really start off as a trauma they go into i get angry with my partner or when my kids make noise i cannot control myself and i start screaming and i'm oh my god i'm screaming at them or i need to hide myself in my room when stuff is happening because i get easily overwhelmed or you are in a job and you start hating your boss and you leave your job and the next one you hate your boss again and you hate your boss again and then at some point you may start thinking is it my boss or is it me that is really bad and usually i think people usually get in touch with these things not by their own observations but the people around them people who say honey i love you but if you continue to do this i just cannot be with you any longer friends who no longer talk to you co-workers who avoid you usually it is your irritability or you're being out of tune are you blowing up all the time or not making no space for other people that creates interpersonal conflicts and misery and you start of usually saying it's all your fault and then at some point you realize and maybe it's not all my fault it's really interesting in my work i'm into psychedelic treatments these days that people deal with stuff from their past and suddenly they say i thought my sister was the most terrible person around we always fight and now i spend time with my sister and we enjoy each other And nothing has happened between the two of them, but their own energy has changed. they don't irritate other people anymore or don't scare other people anymore. , that's a fascinating example. Those signs that you mentioned, there were quite a few there. And I think they were really great examples because I think a lot of people will go, , wait a minute, wait a minute, that might be me, that might be me, that might be me. I'm on my fifth marriage and I keep choosing somebody who is horrible. Maybe there's something about me. . I mean, let's say one example. I think one example you said was, if my kids are shouting, I shout or I get annoyed. Or if my kids even make a little bit of noise. , let's take that as a practical example. Someone might say, , Bessel, , but if my kids are making noise, is it not for me to get, , maybe a little bit of noise and make them frustrated and want them to be quiet? What would you say to them? Oh, I'd say, of course, you need your warning signs and you cannot shut off your warning signs. And it's very good to know what scares you and what upsets you. But if it scares you, as a result, you blow up your family and everybody becomes scared of you and people walk tiptoe around you, you have a problem with your hand. And maybe there is something about you, that's, that's the thing that scares you. And then you go into, where else has this shown up? . And we oftentimes talk to language of parts. How old is this part? How long have you noticed you suddenly going into these rage reactions? And is the kid seven years old or four years old? And people oftentimes say, , I remember kindergarten, but they say before that time, it didn't feel that way. I say, do you, do you start sort of dissecting the situation to see where this stuff has its origin sometimes? What does trauma actually do to us physiologically? What does it do to our brain? What does it do to our body? , it really changes what Antonio Damasio calls the housekeeping of the body. Trauma is really about an overwhelming experience of, of terror. Terror is already too high. It is your whole organism freezes or gets disorganized. And then that continues. And it affects many, many different parts of the brain, mainly deep down having to do with appetite, having to do with motivation, having to do with arousal, having to do with sleep, a very elementary bodily functions get affected by trauma. And it's really about, it's about a body that no longer knows how to take care of itself in some ways. And that's something people barely mention, but most trauma symptoms are symptoms of a body that cannot take care of itself. We talked before about the enormous amount of drug addiction and alcoholism, according to trauma, people take these drugs in order to calm their bodies down or in order not to get out of control. People don't know how to control themselves. They don't take heroin in order to make you feel bad about somebody taking heroin. You take this stuff because you cannot stand the way you feel. And traumatized people are enormously vulnerable to indulge in substances and behaviors to just desperately try to not lose control over themselves. As a medical doctor myself, I probably thought many years ago that if you can educate patients and help them understand what they need to do, let's say food, nutrition, adequate sleep, moving your body regularly, managing stress, I used to think that would be enough. But I've realized time and time again, that knowledge in and of itself is not enough. And I think one of the things we get wrong in medicine or when I say wrong, maybe I say is incomplete is let's take alcohol as that example. We might say with public health guidelines, how many units of alcohol you can drink a week without it impacting your liver and your cancer risk. It's very dry. I don't think it connects with people. And what it fails to do is help that individual understand what role does alcohol play in my life? What role does excess sugar play in my life? What role does gambling play in my life? And I feel that the missing link for many people is this kind of hidden trauma that they've not processed. they can try their best to make better choices, but they'll always be driven back because there's a dysregulation in how they feel about themselves. There's a dysregulation in their nervous system. , trauma lodges itself in a very elementary housekeeping part of your brain. It's not a rational process. It's not , oh, let me drink some alcohol in order to make the feeling go away. Hey, you feel, , you're feeling, , you're feeling, , you're feeling out of control. You feel discombobulated, you feel out of control, you feel out of sorts. And then you discover that if I drink alcohol, I feel much better. Or my doctor says alcohol is bad for my liver, but to hell with my liver, because alcohol makes me feel much better. And I don't care if my liver gets disease because of these very elementary feelings. Darwin already talks about this. The trauma is lived out as heartbreaking and gut-wrenching sensations. And that's something we all are familiar with. If something terrible happens in our lives, we feel it in our gut. It's gut-wrenching, heartbreaking. And it's the sensory world you live in that becomes unbearable. And then you start doing stuff, whatever you can, to make these feelings go away. What really struck me about the ACE study, the famous study of Feletti, of the prevalence of traumatic insulin. This is ACE, Adverse Childhood Explosion. , it's a study of experiences, . That all of the things that they identify have to do with your relationship to your body, an increase in smoking, an increase in obesity, an increase in heart disease, an increase in alcoholism, an increase in drug use. This has all things having to do with, I don't my body or I don't trust my body or I cannot take care of my body. , the very thing that you try to promote It needs to come from inside. Your doctor cannot tell you, you have to love your body. I have to learn to love my body. But if I've been beaten up as a kid and I'm always feeling terrible inside, my body is not my friend. . Your book, your seminal book is called The Body Keeps the Score. A few things to sort of comment on it. It's over 10 years since that first came out. It's still selling by the bucket loads today. ? It's one of those once in a generation phenomenas. Something comes out. I imagine you couldn't have predicted this sort of level of No way, no way. Success and connection with people all over the world. I'm interested in why you think it has resonated deeply with many people. And then it also, for people who haven't read the book, first of all, you really should read it. But 10 years on, how would you briefly summarize the key message in that book? , the key message is that horrendous life events, including disruptive detachment, a very big thing is who do you feel safe with, who cares for you, determine or shape your biology and then leads a life of its own and expresses itself. And it expresses itself. And it expresses itself. And it expresses itself in a variety of different ways. But you can do something about it. Basically, I tried to give a message of hope, of you need to develop language for yourself. You need to understand yourself. And then you may want to start doing yoga and alter the relationship you have to your body. And yoga, our research shows, is very effective. Or you may want to do neurofeedback to change the neural, the neural circuits in your brain you can be more focused and pay more attention. Or you may do theater and see what it feels to play a different role and to embody a different role than the role you ordinarily inhabit. You and I went through that. We went to medical school. And the first day in medical school, people call you doc. You go, who are you talking to? And you feel this inadequate, stupid little kid who's trying to lose it. And then slowly over time, you become a doctor. And it changes your identity. And it changes your relationship to yourself. And then it gives you a certain sense of, I'm a very competent person who can sometimes make an enormous difference. your identity changes by the roles you play. And if you're an unemployed person in a poverty-stricken area, your role is to be an unemployed. How can you feel? How can you feel proud? How can you feel competent if you cannot bring home the bacon for your family? the social conditions make a huge difference, but also the identity you get. And one of the things I'm worried about with the popularity of my book and the word trauma coming into our culture is that people increasingly may claim the mantle of being a victim. And because this happened to me, I cannot be held responsible for what I do. And once you get an identity as a victim, then you're allowed to do all kinds of things. And it's important for us as physicians, as therapists, as school teachers, to help people to get a sense of competency. Very deep, deep sense of I can do stuff, but that's not really the focus of many of our social systems. I think that's such an important point. I mean, for me, one of the root cause decisions we make as individuals in life that will determine massively the quality of our lives is whether we take a victim mindset or not. And we have no idea that's going to happen. , and also, I also acknowledge that some people, many people have lived through horrendous experiences. I'm not saying I don't understand it. I fully understand it. But whilst you remain a victim to your past or external events, you, , this is in essence, what you're talking about, trauma, it lives on inside you. How would you phrase it? I would frame it that I need to function. And that's what I see in most people I work with. I need to go on with my life. I'm going to be the best school teacher I can be, I can be the best tennis player I can be, despite the fact that I feel scared to death when I am in a sexual situation. But I'm going to try to function. I'm going to try to function. I'm going to try to function. I'm going to try to function. I'm going to try to function. I'm going to try to function. I'm going to try to function. I'm going to try to function as I can. And then, but don't, but to realize that life goes on. And when you get stuck in your victimhood, life passes you by. The only thing that you can experience is insult and injury. . But how to shift that orientation is not, it's not you tell yourself that. It's mainly being with somebody, a spouse, a boyfriend, a girlfriend, a friend who helps you to, to focus on what's going on, and to help you focus on being able to do things that give you a sense of pleasure and enjoyment. , , if someone says, look, Bessel, your book and the wider education around trauma compared to 10 years ago has really helped me, , see that my childhood is a huge part of why I feel the way I feel today around the world, ? . If someone says to you, look, my parents weren't there for me. They weren't attuned to me, you've already mentioned, as it's a key thing, ? There wasn't joy. There wasn't music when I was growing up. It was scary for me. I didn't know how my dad was going to react, ? The TV was always blaring. , . And they then say to you, , understanding that has really helped me, . understand that has really helped me, understand who I am today. I have every to be reactive and angry and drink alcohol because that was my upbringing. What would you say to them? What people say is, I now understand why I do the things I do, and that gives me a better handle on how to create a life for myself. And , , it's very interesting that, Jamie Pennebaker is a language researcher at University of Texas, and he asked one group of people to write about their trauma, another group of people to write about their trauma, and how it's affecting their life now. The people who wrote about their trauma, nothing changed. He studied immune systems, health, and functioning, and when people said, this is how it has affected me, made a huge difference, because once how it affects you, you can actually start making a difference. You can actually start making decisions about yourself, of , , I get very angry with my kids. My dad used to beat me up when I make kids scream. I get into a sense of panic, and I lose control of myself, just my dad. And I am going to try not to do that. And I'm going to learn to sit down on the floor on my knees and play with a model train. But that's the key for me. , . Yes, get an understanding of your upbringing and your experiences, and your childhood, and the way you were parented. But don't stay there, use it to understand yourself. And then, I don't know, that's how I see it. I feel that I think that victimhood mentality is very, very common. And I do think that is, as you say, that's one of the unforeseen risks of an increased education around trauma, is I feel, and I guess I've seen this with many patients over the years, that they stay in their comfort zone, and they don't want to be in their comfort zone. But they don't want to be in their comfort zone anymore. They don't want to stay there. It's a progress of evolution and learning and understanding. But you can stop and stay locked in what happened to you in your past without using it as a way of learning and moving forward and taking agency. I think it may become an alibi, an alibi for your dysfunctional behaviour. But telling people you should make different choices doesn't work either. Then people need to be offered the possibility of doing things differently. and to somebody to say to them have you ever thought about joining a church choir have you ever thought about cooking for homeless people have you ever thought about doing karate lessons people need to be invited and given the opportunity to discover what make what makes a difference people don't you generally don't do this on their own and that's a thing that's where we as physicians and mental health professionals come in not to tell people you shouldn't behave that way no for sure but they really say boy it really looks you don't see other possibilities and let's explore some other possibilities and i will be with you as you explore that just giving people a little sheet to take home with instructions it's not going to work people need that human encouragement and that's certainly in the us the breakdown of medicine is that people are no longer have a relationship with their doctor you go to the doctor to fix a little problem to get a pill but you don't have somebody who is there for you and guides you in your health but when you have somebody i happen to have somebody in rural vermont of all places in a very far i live among some of the famous most famous hospitals in the world in boston i get my premier medical care in the world of medicine and i have a doctor who is a doctor who is a doctor who is a doctor who is a rural community far away why is that because the doctor there knows me and we spend time together and each other over time and that's what we all need somebody who says hey how are you doing last time you were struggling with this how is that going and what has worked and what hasn't worked and we need all the people in our lives who have a very deep interest in us and medicine is really falling apart about on that score i mean i completely agree and i really do believe that any good health care professional doctor nutritional therapist psychotherapist counsellor whatever it is i think having that deep connection with your patient or client and it's not about us telling them what to do it's helping them as you say see possibilities helping them have agency there has to be something i believe that they feel very strongly in our lives and frankly what has been the biggest attraction the some people i've heard about this and i thought i always wanted to ask about how it impacts the people but i think that's really the one that it has been all with us as it is really the beginning thing to where we just whiteknassembled doing something we you head best and i think you feel very confident about what you do what you do and you go around the world a lot you feel i just want to talk to everybody and i think it was something to i think what i was and i build now they can do proactively in their life that's gonna make a difference. It can't just be, I'm dependent on this psychotherapist, I'm dependent on this doctor, and without this person, I'm gonna struggle. I think that agency is really important. But working out of an office, as I do with my pyrotechnic, this guy knows me. This guy sees me. In Boston, the big hospitals, I never have the feeling anybody sees me. They just give me a pill to fix my problem. I had a great example this past week. I was visiting my brothers in Netherlands, and we talked about different parts of our youth, and my brother suddenly says to me, oh, , I think what made a big difference for you growing up was your fourth grade teacher, and he mentioned the name. And I think, you're my brother? 70 years later, the name of my fourth grade teacher, and now the fact he had on me? And it was just, it was stunning for me to feel. My brother knows me, and he remembers details of my life that nobody else knows. And that was, somebody should measure my cytokines and stress hormones at that moment, because I bet something changed in my body, feeling seen and known by somebody. , super powerful. And I think that's very, if, , John Bowlby, the great attachment researcher from here, he said, if you're not known to other people, you're not known to yourself. And I think that's a huge dimension in medicine and education, that oftentimes people are not known by the people, but the moment you feel this person knows me, the shame goes down, and you become accepting of yourself, and you start making changes, . For someone to know you, you have to be vulnerable with them. You have to open up with them, and let them see you, which, of course, . will find very hard. Now, people pleasing is a very common trait that many people have. I certainly used to have it to a very high degree. I hope, I think it's much, much less than it used to be. But people pleasing is often an attempt to, I guess, manipulate other people's perception of you. Because you're often not truly being yourself because you want to be accepted, ? you're saying the things, doing the things, the people around you, but that's not the same as knowing you, is it? That's true. And it depends very much on the giver part, the doctor, the professional, that they take an interest in you, not only whether you behave . Psychiatry is all about behavioral health. What does behavioral health mean? Don't be a pain in the ass. That's really what it means to me. It's totally , let me control you don't bother other people. But that's not our job. Our job is for people to actualize themselves and to really bring out the optimal functioning. And if you say to people, , if you deal with people , let's really get to know each other, then maybe the people pleasing part will hold on. You may even say to people, , I think it's important for you to, feel I you, but do you yourself? And how do you feel about yourself? But how do you feel how you are doing? And you say that with compassion and people say, oh, this person really wants to know me. And once people want to, you feel that somebody else knows you, your whole existence changes. , I learned that very on in my career as a doctor, especially when I moved to general practice from specialism. And to make sure you're taking action after watching this video, I've created a free guide to help you build healthy habits. We can all make short term change, but can those changes become a fundamental part of our life? Often they don't. And that's why in this free guide, I share with you the six crucial steps you need to take. They're really, really effective. If you want to get hold of that free guide now, all you have to do is click the link in the description box below. All you have to do is click the link in the description box below. All you have to do is click the link in the description box below. All you have to do is click the link in the description box below. All you have to do is click the link in the description box below. , I think I've mentioned this a couple of times on the podcast in the past, but I think it was in my first or second week as a GP. I do remember this young lady came in and she definitely had symptoms consistent with a diagnosis of depression. And I was looking at my, the protocols that we had and, , it would be very easy for me to have prescribed her an antidepressant, an SSRI or something. But , I didn't want to do that. I just thought I need to know her first. I need to, I can't just see her for 10 minutes, give her that and say, I'll see you in four weeks. It just feels completely wrong and against everything I stand for. I did something really that's getting less and less common in medicine. I talked to her. , we had a 10 minute consultation, but I ended up spending 30, 35 minutes with her talking, even though there were patients waiting. I invited her back the following day. I said, look at the end of my morning surgery tomorrow. If you come in, we'll chat a bit more. And I would see her once a week for the next few weeks. And I just talked to her and I'm not kidding you, Vessel. Within four to six weeks, she was a different person. A lot of those symptoms had started to fall away. She was feeling better. And I thought, wow, I didn't learn this at medical school, but all I've done for her, and maybe she doesn't have this in her own life. I provided for her. I ran a New York mental story for her. , to be able to work neighborhood verz. I thought that was a great way to defensive other doctors, professional. Health, health care, it was. People wanted to train people in.' The important thing about using pills, because we, when we stay comfortable, we now have to God don't see things, you walk in and you're feeling fairly good in your Sisely, over human connection. And I don't have anything against psychiatric drugs. Sometimes they help some people, but what we lost is that connection and that feeling of somebody knows me, somebody sees me, somebody is concerned about me. I think that's basically disappeared out of American medicine. It's going that way here in the UK as . Bessel, in your book, one of my favorite phrases, and there are many, but the one I've written down to talk to you about is this one. If the body is storing trauma in its musculature, in its hormonal pathways, then it is the body that needs experiences that deeply and viscerally contradict the helplessness, rage, or collapse that result from trauma. I think it's really, really powerful. We in the West at least are a very head-based society. Everything's about thought and our rational minds. One of the key things I got from your book many years ago when I first came across it is this idea that the body stores trauma, ? . But go on, how would you explain that? Because that's a controversial idea to some people. , but although it's become a meme, it's stunning that the New York Times crossword puzzle had the body keeps its core. It's rock songs are being written about the body keeps its core. Oh, you can retire now, you made it. That's crazy. You made it. That's crazy. But it's not true that the body remembers, but you lived out the traumas through your, to the periphery of your body, how your muscles tense up. As somebody said way before me, an angry person lives in an angry body. A depressed person lives in a depressed body. You carry these things inside of you. Very meaningful to me, because I think, , I'm not a person who's always trying to be a hero, I'm not a person who's always trying to be a hero, I'm a person who's always trying to be a hero, I think watching those old videos and I'm an expert on, but I love that when I read a big social literature, and looking at it, I find that I've. I'm the youngest in the world, the youngest, could this be me, Istation is dead if I'm left behind. I think it's definitely four. It's always the worst thing for conscious thinking without any tools man, that we use that can kill any person. , parents, thoughts, . . . You shouldn't do that, God's name Sheila. You just live taking all these all my partner's thoughts., . . . Apron therapeutic experience I've had because my body was locked in the body of that asthmatic scared kid. And after getting involved, my body, I lived in a different body. . And no amount of psychotherapy would have been able to do that. This is such an important point that I feel I've really, couple of things have happened over the last five or 10 years that have really helped me understand the body's role in trauma or health or the way the body holds things. I found, I can think of five or six different examples. I mean, two that come to mind. Quite a few years ago now, when I was experimenting with this trainer at a gym, I just did it for two or three months just to feel what it, , what is it ? I heard really good things about this guy. And he also did lots of active release on your muscles and things. And, , I always used to have in inverted commas, tight hamstrings. . And I would just, at the end of each session, he'd spend some time stretching them and loosening them, but they'd always come back. Anyway, I didn't see him for a year or two. And in that time, I think I was doing some internal family system therapy work with this amazing guy who lives near to me called Christian. And I was just feeling lighter and freer just in my whole being. And I was driving past the gym one day and I sort of, or I knew I was gonna be there. I called up and I said, oh, let's have a session. And funnily enough, he basically examined my hamstrings. He said, Ron, what have you been doing? They're really, really loose. , , . And again, there's a lot more detail there, but in essence, me working on my past and my trauma changed my body, ? It wasn't through stretching my hamstrings. That's . That's . It was mechanical. It was mechanical. . But I think it works both ways as . , , that's . That's . Because you can also free up your body. I spoke to, we've not put this episode out yet. I spoke to this incredible movement coach called Lawrence Van Lingen last week. And he takes a very holistic approach. And Helen Hall, who I work with, and he basically was saying that what he's noticed over the years is that people who often have been traumatized often go into a more sort of, , a more, , a more, , a more, , a more, , a more, , a more, , a more, , a more, , a more, , sort of a flexion type fetal position. And if he can help them open up, and in particular with running, he would talk about it from extending from the hips, which many people can't do, not only does their running get better, but their whole being and who they are. It's fascinating, isn't it? Oh , oh . And it goes both ways. It goes both ways. And for example, if you have been molested as a kid, you're likely to have problems with touch. One of the most, maybe the most comforting thing in life is to be touched, to be held throughout life basically. But if you're afraid of touch, you live in an untouched body, you live in an unloved body and maybe, and I really take it very seriously with my patients who I always, almost always send to body people, body workers, you need to learn the pleasure of being touched, the safety of being touched. But as long as you're afraid of human touch and comfort, your mind cannot really get better in some ways. This is fascinating. in my second book, The Stress Solution, I wrote a whole chapter on touch and it was heavily influenced by Professor Francis McGlone at the University of Liverpool, who's done incredible work on touch and how we have these CT afferent nerve fibers and when they're stroked, it goes all the way to the kind of primitive parts of the brain, the lowest stress levels, cortisol. And I remember when we put that episode out that I recorded with him and when the book came out, some people go on and say, , look, I understand that human touch, effective, consensual, wanted human touch can be very, very beneficial, but I don't to be touched. And you're now saying, it's really interesting, you're saying that if you were molested as a child, you may struggle with that. Is that something people can, heal from? human touch is, as you say, one of those basic things that we need, that we thrive on. Have you had patients before who struggled with this and through various therapies, they got to the point where they could? , absolutely. Maybe I should put in a plug for a book by my own body worker. I lived in a small village in the mountains, and somebody taps me on my shoulder and says, I'm a body worker, we could to have an experience with me. And I have my own body worker. Carden Babin is his name. Something about the body. But yes, you can change. And my wife is a body worker. And also a psychedelic therapist. And she starts off with tuning forks. Just a little tuning fork and put it in your chest. And that may be almost too much for some people. you need to very gradually open up your mind to your body. You need to activate those connections. The brain has to do, it's called the insulat. that. But explain it anyway for the audience who may not. But there's an organ in the body that tells you what your body is feeling and what your body needs. There's a two-way communication. For example, if you go out, you think, is it waning? And you feel the feeling of what waning would. You go, I better get an umbrella. you need to be aware of that. And if you're not aware of what's going on in your body, you get situations people who are pregnant and think they're just becoming obese. Because they start to touch their bodies. Really? Oh . It's not uncommon actually. But people actually feel nothing in their bodies. And as long as you cannot feel anything in your body, you cannot feel pleasure. You cannot feel human connection. your whole world, it gets locked up. And you need to slowly open up your relationship to your body. You need to know where you have to go poop. You need to know these things. And things can get disrupted that people don't know anymore that they need to go to the bathroom and stuff that. But these are, we would call these, I mean, medicine might call these dysfunctional states, ? But can we not just reframe this? And go, , the reason you cannot at the moment, or one of the reasons why you cannot feel your bodily sensations is because it was an appropriate response to the trauma, ? Which served you for a period of time perhaps, but it's no longer serving you. And I think people tell me that information in my book was helpful for them. I'm not much of a cognitive therapist. I don't think you'd buy that. I don't think you'd buy that. I don't think you'd be advising people up much by doing that. But a lot of people say, yes, understanding that this happened to me makes me not feel crazy. . I think that's the big thing. Oh, I can't feel my body because I shut down my context, my body, because I was being molested all the time. And that's how I learned to cope. As Dick Schwartz, who invented IFS, which about, says, all parts are welcome because every part of you used to fulfill a function. There's a reason why your body can't feel anything. For me, it's always how interesting that you cannot feel when you have to go to the bathroom, rather than you bad person, you can't feel that. It's , that's fascinating. I mean, most people can. How does that happen? And you find always, and that's why the trauma model becomes terribly important. You said you're not much of a cognitive therapist. . . And. The thing I've been really sort of playing with in my mind, particularly because I knew I was going to meet you again and talk to you, is that there's multiple ways to heal. I think for most things, there's multiple ways to heal. And people all have their own biases over the therapies that they've seen that work for them. And then they think that the same therapy is going to work for everyone. It's kind of , that's certainly not how I see the world. But. . . If the body. If the body keeps the score. . And many of us live in a very head-based society, where we try and think our way through issues. Can you heal trauma with thought alone? Or do you have to deal with the body as ? I don't have the answer for that. , because I only see people who I see. . . And there may be all sorts of people out there. One thing that I know is that doctors and therapists think that they're the answer. But there's multiple ways of getting better. . Maybe it's your tennis coach. Maybe it's your yoga teacher. Maybe it's your theatre teacher. I know we're very much into trauma. We have learned much from theatre experiences in order to help people to get better. And there's other ways besides. this legacy of Freud, you sit down, you talk about your internal world and you get better. And in fact, I researched that. And research if people really get better from knowing and remembering everything. And what we found out, no, even if everything and can talk about it, the symptoms oftentimes still don't go away. . And , for example, what you brought up earlier, experiences. I think do martial arts. It's a spectacularly powerful way for people who have been molested as kids to get a sense of agency in their body. And , I am a powerful person inside, not cognitively, but you feel a powerful person after you do karate chops. Or if you become a tango dancer, , my body can really do all kinds of complicated stuff. . It's interesting. When you first came on my podcast, I don't know, a year and a half ago, something that. We spoke about various movement modalities that can be helpful for people for all kinds of things and also trauma. You mentioned yoga. I think you touched on martial arts. Theater is something and drama you spoke about, which I found fascinating. And I've got to say, when my son was making his subject choices for GCSE, I don't know what you would call it in America. basically when you're about 13, 14, and then you've got two years of kind of. When you narrow down the subjects and then you were examined on them at the age of sort of 15 or 16. . And he kind of, he loved all his subjects. . it wasn't easy. And when he was looking at various options, I think what you said to me about theater and drama really was at the back of my mind. he's actually doing drama as the academic stuff. He's also doing drama. . And I think. I think that conversation. . That conversation influenced me in the way I had those conversations. Because I kind of, I feel strongly that I think I have a lot of concerns over how we educate kids in the UK and the US. And the things that we focus on. And it's more about work and academics and the time they get to play and go outside and move their bodies. In some schools it's getting reduced. And I think it's a very dangerous thing to do. Oh, absolutely. Which we can talk about. But I thought, , , theater, having to play other roles. Move your body. Do things that maybe are not natural to you at this point. Not natural to you. To you, exactly. I thought it would be very, very helpful. I want to say thank you for that. Because he is doing drama. . But there's this wider point for me, which we touched on a little bit on stage yesterday, which I really want to put to you. The reason I asked you the question about healing with thought alone wasn't necessarily to get the answer. It was more to promote discussion around this topic. since my dad died in 2013, I feel that I've, that was the big moment for me to start going inwards and looking at my life and making sense of my life. And I've done a variety of things on that journey. . Including IFS, internal family systems therapy by Dick Schwartz. Including working with great movement coaches to move more efficiently. . But I will still say, as I mentioned to you yesterday, that one of the most powerful experiences I've had that fundamentally changed me was my podcast conversation with Edith Eger. , . . 93-year-old lady, when I spoke to her, went to Auschwitz when she was 16, survived Auschwitz, came out, spoke with just forgiveness and love and compassion. Really quite remarkable how forgiving as a human being she was. And there's many things she taught me in that conversation. One of the, , without going into the whole conversation, , one of the final things she said to me was that, was Rangan, look, I have lived in Auschwitz and I can tell you the greatest prison you will ever create. . Is the prison you create inside your own mind. . . And that really resonated with me. And- That's the perspective when Auschwitz survived. Exactly. Because her statement is absolutely correct. But if you can say that after Auschwitz- Exactly. that, I remember because it was a remote conversation. It was in the middle of COVID. It wasn't in person. And I remember finishing the conversation, and because of the time difference between California and the UK, it was in the evening. And by the time it finished, I knew I could get into the house and go and put my kids to bed. But I just had to pause. , I fundamentally felt differently. I will still say to this day, I was not the same person at the end of that two hours as at the start of those two hours. And I can apply my rational mind and go, , whenever I struggle to reframe something in life, which is rare these days, but when I used to struggle, I'd go, hey, Rangan, listen, Edith could reframe stuff in Auschwitz. ? She basically started to see the prison guards as prisoners. She said they weren't free in their mind. I was free in my mind. that was- Stunning. It's stunning. It's hugely inspiring to me. I've taken that as inspiration. I'm not saying that would connect with everyone. For some reason, at that point in my life, it deeply connected with me. I feel now having practiced actively reframing situations in life, I feel now that unless I'm sleep deprived or chronically stressed, I feel I'm not the same person. . I feel that I rarely get triggered anymore in the way that I used to. Now, I put a lot of it down to that conversation. . getting back to the point about thought or body, that was a cognitive conversation. , that's why I'd to- . I disagree with you on that. See, what I think happened is you met an amazing person, a truly astonishing person, and your mirror neuron system in your brain picked up the energy of this unbelievable person. And that allows you to take a new take on reality, but it's the energy on a deeper level in your brain that makes you open for reframing some stuff. . And some people have the capacity. I spent a fair amount of time with Desmond Tutu. Have you? After you met Tutu, you're not the same person. You just feel the astounding energy and wisdom of this person. And I think most of us have the good fortune of sometimes meeting people where you go , just sitting with this person, the energy of the wisdom of the person gets downloaded to some degree on you. . I love that perspective. And what I was going to get to was, although I can, with my rational mind, say it was thought and the wisdom she imparted in my brain was what changed me, I don't think that can completely explain it. . As you say. I can't remember how I felt, but I know I felt different. . I just thought, I was literally mesmerized afterwards. . And I don't know if it was possible to measure certain things in my body, ? I imagine it pre and post that conversation. . I think my body was keeping score. . And I feel that my body was able to let go of certain things probably through that interaction with her. . But I can't prove that. What comes to my mind is that the moment that our current president of America said, I would not run for re-election, I wish I had a physiological measurement of people in America. And I think our biology changed at that moment because up to then we had a choice in the next election, be a demented person and a psychopath. And we were all in a state of despair. And then we had new candidates who looked really bright and optimistic. And my whole system has changed because the future no longer is between a demented person and a psychopath. . There's options in the world. Hope. Hope is such an important thing. . And your conversation with this Auschwitz survivor, you go , oh my God, if she can survive that, she can survive anything. And you got a sense of hope. . And that is such a critical aspect. . That's such a critical element. And many people live in an environment locked into TV shows, where they don't have any hope. . And I think that's a very important part of our educational system to also give people possibilities. . Show what can be done. And it goes back to what we were talking about earlier, which is the importance of any healthcare professional, and frankly, any individual taking beyond healthcare. you want to give that person your way to agency. . And hope. And agency. I think it's really important. I hear it all the time. Doctors saying to the patient, you will not get better. This is chronic condition. I know. And I know quite a lot of people who actually have, who have beaten the odds. Why they have beaten the odds, I can sort of speculate about where it was. But to tell a patient this is a hopeless condition, you have to live with it for the rest of your life, is malpractice. . Even though the statistics are on your side. . . . We've got to be careful with the language we use and what we, what information we impart to the person sitting across from us. . And if our energy is this incurable, it's bad for you because as a physician, because I'm helpless and I cannot do anything for you. And the patient says, you're helpless. what a condemnation that is. . Best of. in our first conversation, we spoke of all these different movement and body-based therapies, which people can revisit if they want to get your take on those things. On stage yesterday at the master series conference in Oxford, I asked you a question. I said to you, if you were writing The Body Keeps the Score today, what would you change? And you said to me, the only thing you would change, the only thing which I found staggering is that you would add a new chapter on psychedelics. . many patients tell me that life just feels a blur because of the pressures that many of us face. The busyness, the overwhelm, the endless to-do list. I've heard it time and time again. Why haven't things changed? Why can't I bring these healthy habits into my life and make them stick? I've been a medical doctor for over two decades and I have to say one of the most transformative practices I have ever seen is the practice of journaling. Because it breaks. It breaks. It breaks the loop. We have these unconscious patterns, these subconscious patterns running our lives. We don't realize how many anxieties and worries and concerns we have whirring around. And journaling is a very simple way to get the stuff out of your brain. You get it down onto paper and you see it. And that does something really, really powerful. When does the new diet that you were following fall by the wayside? When does the new healthy habit that you were sticking to start to fall by the wayside? That's the self-awareness that journaling is going to give you. When people ask the questions, they get the answers, and those answers allow them to change their life. Take up journaling today and watch your life start to change. . Maybe five chapters for a second. Five chapters. . Maybe. But because it's a very big deal. for someone who has come across this conversation, it's a very big deal. . . . , it has come across this conversation and has grown up with the view that, in inverted commas, drugs are illegal, they're toxic, they're things to be avoided. I want you, from your perspective, to outline please, what is the big deal about psychedelics? Why are you passionate about them and why do you think they could be pivotal in the future of mental health? , I think the big thing is that it's a very long term idea. I mean, the real deal is, I work in the field, and I'm a doctor, and I do research. And that's the ultimate thing, is you can look up my name and type in MDMA, and you'll see a bunch of papers that show that MDMA, our treatment method, was probably more effective than anything we have studied up to now. there's data. It's not just feelings. But there's also an attitudinal difference, and that is that, , I'm 81 years old. I grew up in the US. . the 60s we took acid that's part of my culture that I grew up in and I didn't drop acid a lot but several times and I have a bunch of very prominent scientific friends and I say to my friend did you also drop acid and they all say I did too I say what did it do for you how does it affect you and they say because I think it's because of acid that big became a great scientist because an acid I got to understand that the reality that I live in my own head is such a small segment of an awful reality and that is also my experience I had not taken drugs since for 50 years or something until this opportunity came along but I knew that psychedelic agents open up your minds to new possibilities can we just pause there a minute there's a couple of terms you've used which I think are very important to understand I think people may just need a bit of guidance through that you mentioned MDMA and you mentioned acid could you just quickly walk people through when we say psychedelics what are we talking about what are these different terms it's interesting MDMA is a party drug supposedly what is the sample ecstasy or Molly it's known on the street that's the drug that we did this very serious research about acid is LSD not many people use it these days but has potential psilocybin of course and it's very popular and it's good research on it also ketamine is an anesthetic that I use a fair amount in my practice a completely different organ and you have ibogaine chemical from Africa that seems to have has been studied for treatment of addiction there's a LSD and it's called diabetes plus l it's a good drug which is limited in some senses operate las open up your mind to new experiences. You get out of your locked state of viewing the world and realizing there's much more than what you thought. if you want to know more about it, David Nutt at Imperial College, of course, has done more studies on different things than anybody else. you may want to listen to him. A lot of people have heard the term ayahuasca. Oh, ayahuasca is not a drug. I'm not scared of ayahuasca. It's a very impure substance. It comes from the jungle. You don't know what's in it. But I have seen people who were dramatically positively affected by ayahuasca. I also know a few people who got really messed up by it. , I think the potential negatives are definitely something we have to be aware of. you're basically saying the category that we call psychedelic drugs, there's MDMA, there's acid, there's psilocybin, there's ketamine. And ayahuasca. Ibogaine and ayahuasca. There's actually many more. Many more. , fine. But you're excited about their potential in helping people heal from trauma. Our data. part-time a researcher and data, strict, obsessive. And part-time a clinician. Our data are spectacular. And we have our clinical experiences. But clinical experiences you cannot quite trust. Because you. You have an N of one or you've only seen five people and there's five people. you need to do research to see what happens to a larger group of people. And what we found in our research is that there was a dramatic change in the PTSD score with very good MDMA psychotherapy assisted therapy. you have therapists to be with you as you go through the experience. People in our study, generally, accessed very painful material. it was not a fun trip at all. It's actually puzzling in a way to me that it's known as a party drug. Because in our study, it's mainly a trauma drug. People really come up with very bad stuff. They go through the pain and they become aware of this happened to me. But this happened to me when I was three years old or 18 years old. And people get a sense of time and perspective and say, I was just a little kid. Or I was just a stupid kid who was handed a machine gun and sent to a place where people blowing each other up. I did terrible things. But I was just a stupid kid back then. And what you see is a dramatic change in people's self perception. What you see is people become compassionate about themselves. And our earlier conversation was much about shame. You should do this. You're inadequate. Chronically times, people always feel ashamed about it. They feel ashamed about themselves. Why am I fat? Why am I drinking? Why am I taking drugs? I'm just a terrible person. And on the substances, people go , Oh, I eat much because I can't stand my body. And I don't want anybody to take a sexual interest in me. And you get this different perspective in yourself. And you go , but today is today. And the past is the past. And the past may have been horrible, but I don't relive the past anymore. It is a sensational thing for me to see that people really change their whole perspective and orientation primarily on themselves. In practical terms, someone can visualize what this looks . Does a patient, obviously, I'm guessing there's counseling or preparation beforehand, getting them ready. Is it a one hit where they take it once and they have a psychotherapist with them whilst they're doing it? Or is it multiple? Or are we still looking into that? do they be doing it? Or are they just doing it? Or are they just doing it? We did our studies is you get a lot of preparation time. You can really form an alliance with the therapist or therapists. Then you have a whole day. You get debriefed. People are there with you. You process it. You talk about it. You find language for yourself. And then a month later, you have another session. And a month later, you have another session. three. . there's the research protocol. Quite a few people said, the study was over. Boy, I'm not going to do it. Boy, I learned a lot, but I'm not done yet. But because we do research protocol, we stopped at three. And some people after one session said, oh my God, that's fantastic. I'm done. But when you do research protocol, you sort of make it rigid and don't make variations. some people, Basil, who I know some sort of acquaintances and friends who have previously suffered with addiction. . . And let's say have gone through. . 12 step to kind of move beyond their addiction. Some people I know who have gone down that path, they feel nervous about taking another, in inverted commas, drug. . Because it's taken them long to break free from another addiction, they're scared. . But there is research now showing that it can help with addiction. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. . Are they to be fearful? , they're fearful. . , sure. See, that's where you start. . They are fearful. You don't say don't be fearful. I get it. Totally. And then you say, , you give them some data, which reassures them a little bit. Deep down, it doesn't make the fear go away, but they, and you form an alliance with them. And they say, you say, your experience is that it's dangerous. . . And you say, , you're not going to be able to do anything about it. That's the fear. That's the fear. And the fear is that you're not going to be able to do anything. You're not going to be able to do anything about it. . And you say, I don't know, I'm not going to be able to do anything about it. But I've seen many people who really were helped by this medication. I think it's worth your while to try it, because you're being locked in this addiction, or the fear that it will come back, which is there every day for you, is huge that I recommend that we do it very carefully. And I'm with you while you go through it. And I'll take care of you during the experience and afterwards. From what you've seen with patients and from your research, what are the various situations where you feel it can be helpful? You mentioned addiction, you mentioned PTSD. . What other kind of collection of symptoms might you think that's be useful? Chronic depression. Depression. Oftentimes. I'm very curious about OCD, obsessive compulsive disorder, which is treatment resistant. Let's be clear what we mean by that. Treatment resistant. But people don't get better. They don't get better. Whatever we do. . OCD is a very ingrained disease. But it hasn't been studied yet through the lens of psychedelics. Some people are beginning to do it. And I'm somewhat hopeful because again, OCD is a pattern. You always react a certain way. And the psychedelics may open up your pattern network. psychedelics have been shown to change your neuroplasticity in your brain. It's actually a huge issue. And for someone who's never heard that. That term, what does neuroplasticity mean? there's such a thing as, your brain gets organized over time. And as everybody who listens to this knows, at some point, it becomes pretty stable. You're pretty much the same person tomorrow as you are today. And if today you're basically shy and there's a lot of shame inside of you, you can pretty much count it tomorrow you'll feel the same way because these patterns get locked in. And in therapy, you try to change those patterns. But they're very ingrained neuronal patterns in your brain of what gets connected to what. And for a certain window of time, it's different for different one of these drugs, your brain becomes wide open for a new re-patterning. that the things, for example, you were neglected and abused as a kid, that becomes part of who you are and how you continue to live your life. And after MDMA, and we've shown that actually scientifically, we've shown that you're not going to be a drug addict. You're going to be a drug addict. You're going to be a drug addict. You're going to be a drug addict. You're going to be a drug addict. You're going to be a drug addict. You're going to be a drug addict. You may feel , now I know what it feels to be a love child. Is it a bit , this is probably not a great analogy, but I don't know. Let's say you've got an iPhone and you reset it to factory settings, ? And suddenly everything's working again and it's flowing again, ? Could we look at it in some way that if you are stuck and you mind you're finished when it's battery'ed off, that the behavior spills along to a certain point and everything feels very much the other way around? . I think it's not something connected to the time, but it is something that being a drug addict is always going to cover multiple things that I guess there was little about before that, but the longer you try and make yourself laugh and laugh, the more it will playground on that structure of you going girl, whatever is up, ? The more you aren't really aware, really lost. You're going to learn to hold back, ? I'm not gonna say you're not really informed about that because it'll be a little drove on it. Sure. fact than before and but the big thing that we actually just lost on is we try to have MDMA legalized as a psychiatric substance in America in America and but he said you need to do psychedelic assisted psychotherapy somebody needs to be with you because what comes into your brain into your mind into your being at that time can have a transformative experience if you're left alone with a drug and you're reliving your childhood abuse you're going to have a very scary experience if you have somebody sitting with you and holds your shoulder while it's going on or talks into it just stated notice that it will be over before too long and you have this gentle voice this gentle presence then says and what comes into your brain is I can feel badly but it can be comforted during that time which of course is exactly what's missing you avid territori do you mean it's preconceived ideas over what these things are that were clear but i think in psychiatry people are afraid of people feeling pleasure medicine also medicine never talks about pleasure and if and it had talked a lot about addiction potential no on mdma it wears off after a certain time if you take mdma for several weeks in a row you don't it doesn't do anything for you anymore because there's actually no addiction potential because the effects are not reinforcing themselves the effects become less and less with every use it was a completely misinformed study by people who knew neither about psychedelics nor about ptsd and on the panel there was nobody who knew about trauma that's the state of play in america what's the state of play in the uk at the moment i don't quite know where it's in uk i'll meet with the you're gonna see oh you're gonna see the psychedelic society and i'll spend time with david i'm curious how it is but i've been in the netherlands they put out a report about how safe mdma is largely based on our research actually interesting in australia they also legalized it and i what i'm saying to my european colleagues america is such a dominant cultural force that the world still follows america is such a dominant cultural force that even though they follow the broken things of america also and i say as europeans and brits you guys need to get your own voice and not follow americans in this but you can of course you should use our research to make a deal earlier on in the conversation we touched on different cultures and their relationship with trauma and of course there's certain cultures that don't to talk about stuff it's you don't talk about stuff i think you mentioned german upbringings before what did you say about them or certainly german families germans never talked about what the war did to them the japanese never talk about what the war did to them in china you cannot talk about a cultural revolution or gentleman's care it didn't happen but boy the chinese are very good in body work they are very good in dealing with the body but they're terrible about talking hold on but that's really interesting i guess if one of the things you're saying is that the body i was gonna say stores traumas expressed through their body it's pressed to your body you live in a culture where it's not acceptable or at least the done thing that you talk about it do you think things tai chi and qigong for example came about maybe as a way of saying traditional sense if you look at such things as traditional cucIt doesn't shatter the average people really falls over alot of its various irrelevantities is to think about those things but one may look at them ha now as you being first Saxon cares is that it was lost and i think there's an parsley taste there's natural ic brother and Deutsch eat straight there now if i were going to learn how to get the historical way of managing trauma and dealing with it without having to talk about it. Absolutely. That's very much my take on things. I think every culture, this trauma has always been ubiquitous. very much of a part of a culture is how do you deal with trauma? And yoga in India and Qigong and Tai Chi and acupuncture in China, singing and marching in Germany. every culture has this Sufi dancing, maybe in Muslim religion, we don't know, we haven't studied it. But every religion has inculcated trauma methods. And I think for us, as Western researchers, doctors, it's very important to discover what that particular culture has already has, and to honor what is in place there. I mean, I've seen Thai Qigong being practiced in China. And my first reaction is, I was back in early 90s, what are these people doing? And then I joined people in the park and I go, wow, my whole body feels much calmer and more focused. And yoga, bending over, touching your toes and putting your butt in the air. And then you start doing it. I said, wow, this is amazing. This really helps people. One of the things I mean, I want quite, go as far as say I've been concerned about it, but I think about a lot and that we now live these sedentary lives. moving our body is clearly important for physical, mental, emotional, spiritual health, , we literally changes us as we move our bodies and just go for a walk in nature, you can feel fundamentally different about yourself and your life. And I feel and I have to take responsibility that sometimes we have these conversations on this podcast about the importance of let's say, the physical health of our body. And I feel that's a resistance training as you get older, you lose lean muscle mass. And it's important as you get older, to do things that mitigate that loss to keep you as you get older. But I feel with many things we come, we become quite reductionist. And often, of course, moving your body is a good thing, ? But if you're sedentary, and you're in a flexed posture all day, and then you go to the gym to work on your muscles, and you're doing more flexed movements and bicep curls. And , I'm not saying that has no value. But if we look at movement as much more than our lean muscle mass as much more than our physical health, but as an expression of who we are as a human being, you talk about these Eastern modalities, and there's sort of an energy flow through the body with these various movements. I sometimes I wonder, are we missing the big picture of movement? We're missing a big picture. when you talk about weight training. I know at my age I should do weight training. 100. I don't do it. Because it is awkward and not rewarding to do it. But if there were a little shop in my little town that I live in, where I would see my friends, and every Friday morning at night, we're doing weight training, I'll go see my friends. And I'll do weight training. you also need to think about what is rewarding and what are the social conditions. We are tribes, we're connected human beings. I don't know how you do it, but when you go to a gym by yourself, and you don't know anybody, it's not much fun. , it reminds me, have you heard of the Kenyan marathon runner, Elid Kipchoge? , I've heard of him. He's the only, , he's regarded as one of the greatest of all time. , . Marathon runners, he's the only human that we know that has run a marathon in under two hours. And I spoke to him on this podcast a couple of years ago, a week after he broke the world record. And he's a very calm, softly spoken individual, very, very wise. And one of the things I always remember is that he told me he never trains alone. Even though he's one of the fastest people on the planet. He makes everybody else feel terrible. He never trains alone. He goes, no, we always train together. Because it means that if I'm feeling tired, or I don't want to do it, someone's gonna be on the phone. Hey, Elid, where are you? That's . Where are you today? And I said to him, I'm pretty sure I said to him, hey, look, , it's kind of interesting, because in the West, there's nothing wrong with this necessarily, ? It's just interesting to observe. We often go for a run by ourselves to deal with our stressed out lives. . . we then motivate ourselves to put our shoes on and go. Whereas I feel in certain cultures, it's not used for those purposes. They run together, they're chatting there. , what you said about if you were meeting your friends every Friday, you might wait train. But if you have to go to the hotel gym here in Oxford, , I'd rather do it. Are you gonna do it? it's fascinating how different cultures perceive things, isn't it? . . I mean, I've seen these old men are doing bocce together. And they sit together and throw their balls together. And they get their weight training. Because it's social. . To make sure you're taking action after watching this video, I've created a free breathing guide that's going to help you reduce stress, calm your mind and boost your energy. In this guide, I share with you six really simple breathing practices that work immediately, even just one minute a day will start to make a big difference. To receive your free guides, all you have to do is click on the link in the description box below. And I think that's the key thing we learned from the Blue Zones more and more these, these communities that have been studied where they live to a, , ripe old age. And they all have hills. And they've got hills. , they are, , everyone, of course, that the modern reductionist scientific mind wants to reduce it down. What is it? I don't think it's one thing. I think it's a combination of factors. And it's very hard to get away from the fact that every single Blue Zone has community at its heart. . A good example is that I have a research team and we were all we all crestfallen that MDMA was declared illegal. And we had a research retreat at my home to think about what to go do next. And one of the members of the group has a new baby. And he and his wife wasn't , he said, I can't cut the research receipt because I have a new baby. And I said to him, , if you follow the FDA, it's all a chemical disorder. why don't you make sure that your little baby gets the chemicals and just give it you have some neighbor give it to him and come over to research retreat. Ha ha. It's not all to be reduced to one little chemical, because we need that human interaction with it. With each other. That's at our core of our essence of who we are. But this FDA ruling has really frustrated you hasn't it? It is devastating. Our study cost 163 million dollars to do it just . It has the most potential of anything I've studied. I've studied more different methods for dealing with trauma than anybody else alive. From yoga to yoga. From yoga to yoga. From yoga to yoga. From yoga. To neurofeedback to theatre to Prozac. And here we see somebody where you go , wow, there really is hope and now he's will go on the ground. and But that's what already is happening. It's happening because he's That's why, but here you get to the great racial and economic disparities. If you're a black man, and you start using illegal drugs, you'll go to jail. If you are a person of colour who's poor, you gotta I'm not going to touch illegal substances because look, I have this fentanyl epidemic going on in my community. I'm not going to take these illegal drugs. you get into very educated people, they'll know the research and they'll know how to choose somebody for himself on the ground and not being afraid of going to jail. , if you're poor and a person of color, you're crazy to do it. . But all these things have these huge social implications. . Have you got a plan as to what to do next around that? Doing podcasts. that the general public can get to know what it's . And in America, actually every state can make things legal. And we're actually going to not argue with the FDA. Talking to FDA is talking to Trump, what became of the United States. You can't see any difference, but we're going to put it on the ballot and get it legalized state by state. Just what we're planning to work on actually, . It's kind of interesting, many things throughout the course of human history, many, many significant changes haven't actually come from the top down. They've come from the bottom up, these big grassroots movements. Absolutely. , , , my passion in life has to be, has been to, to see what can help people. And I was sort of a very promising junior professor at Harvard studying, pro-sex stuff that, very respectable. Then I started studying yoga and people go , oh my God, he's gone off the deep end. And then I study EMDR, this crazy eye movement treatment, which is spectacularly helpful. , for sure. And people go, oh my God, this guy, he doesn't belong at Harvard. he's studying eye movements, that's crazy. , and now everybody's , oh, I'm not going to do that. Everybody's doing it. But academia is not very exploratory. Academia, judges, are interested in being respectable and getting a lot of donations from rich people. They're not into innovative stuff. The innovative stuff happens in the trenches. We often find, or I've often seen that clinicians, medical doctors yourself, often speak more freely in the latter stages of their career. Now, first of all, I'm not saying you're in the latter stage of your career, ? Let's pretend they're still true. , , to be really clear, I think you've always spoken your mind, from what I can tell, and been very open. You wrote this book, for example, 10 years ago. You must've been writing it 12, 13, 14 years ago. Longer than that, . , do you feel, at the age of 81, more empowered to talk about these things, less worried about judgment and critique from others, which I know a lot of junior clinicians are in the early stages of their career. They don't wanna ruffle feathers. It's they need the respectability, or they feel they need that to progress in their careers. It's fascinating. I think it's a generational issue. And most of my colleagues, including the colleagues you meet at this conference, many of them, we have known each other for 40 years. People who are now in their late 70s, early 80s in the US are a different population. We were not motivated by getting tenure, or we're not afraid about making a living. Somehow, money was not on our way. We were impassioned by finding something. And I think it has something to do with Vietnam. If you didn't protest against the war in Vietnam, you will get sent to Vietnam, you get killed. we were all very politically active, and the civil movement. And we were a major forces in all of our lives growing up. we're going to change society, and there was very active. And I've had students for 50 years now, and every generation is slightly different. And at some point people start talking about self-care. And I go, what is self-care? I didn't think about self-care going to medical school and being every other night on call for my surgery rotation. You just do it. And , and then, oh, maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care. Maybe self-care is relevant. And then people say, I need to have financial security. They say, financial security? I never thought about that. But that's what people are into. the culture changes. It is, that's fascinating, because last time I spoke to Gabor Mate, I think for the fourth time on the show, it was a few months ago, Gabor had just turned 80. , he's my year. , it's fascinating to me that you, Dr. Gabor Mate, and many others are of that age. , . And we've spoken in this conversation about how our culture, influences our beliefs and how we deal with things. But yes, of course, the generation, what we deem or what society deemed important at that time, strongly influences your motivations to do your work. It's incredible. But I'd to say, in the contemporary culture, they ignore six out of the seven deadly sins and they only focus on greed. How the hell did that happen? I mean, acquisition of money was not the primary driver as I was growing up. You want to do something meaningful or you want your dad to approve of you and all kinds of other things. But again, we have to acknowledge that if you grow up in poverty, the acquisition of money may be, for good reason, a primary driver. Could be, but that's not what I see. Really? No, I think this whole, you have to be more successful and make more money, that is not what I grew up with. And I didn't see it in my patients either. -. , I didn't see it in my patients either. I didn't see it in my patients either. I need to have a good life. I want to have a house. I want to have kids. I want to be able to go on vacation, but in order to go on vacation, I obviously need money, but it's really, I really want to travel or I really want to do something. And the money really was largely secondary for most people I've known. , . We started off this conversation and you were very optimistic about humanity in the world. , no, no, that's not true either. , no, no, that's not true either. . No, no, I think, no, we are a self-destructive species. We won't stop climate change. For example, we're in Oxford. I live in Western Massachusetts. I spewed a lot of carbon dioxide in the air flying over here. My brothers no longer fly because they take climate change seriously. How many people do who have stopped flying because they don't want to spew CO2 into the air? Now we are going to destroy ourselves and we are not capable of stopping that. Hold on, hold on. this is interesting. I think you did strike a very optimistic tone at the start. Yes, that too. Which again, you're talking to this kind of these, I think these contradictions that we all have within us and we try and make everything black and white. And I feel all of us have an element of personal hypocrisy. I really do. , . And we are kind and we are awful, both at the same time. . , I guess where I was trying to get to is, given that you have seen some of the darkest things or you've been with people who have experienced some of the darkest things humans are capable of, despite that, it seems to me that you have a very optimistic and hopeful view about the capacity of a human being, the human spirit, what it really means to be human. Would you agree with that? Yes, I would. But very much, if you're on the journey of discovery, if I meet somebody who is motivated and say, I always want to die, but now I have kids and I want to live to see my kids grow up and I go to work on myself to be a real parent for my kids, we'll find a solution. And if that doesn't work, we'll try that. And if you have money, you can explore a lot of different options. If you're poor, you go to pre-existing health care systems where you get cognitive treatment to tell people, you should think differently, I will fix your thoughts. , you get this nonsense stuff. I think once you're in the position of some privilege, some position of agency, the world is open for you. And people can. No, that's what I've seen. seen my practice all my life people can change dramatically for the better they can they can they can given how important our childhood experiences are to how we see the world experience the world and our adult lives what advice would you give to parents who are trying to raise resilient kids as I said yesterday in some ways parents are over values now inside your mom your dad yes your mom and dad are important but are your siblings is the school you go to is the culture you live in your friends are terribly important growing up but sort of friendship happen to meet and then I'm thinking about writing a memoir now and I'm thinking about writing a book about it and I'm thinking about writing a book about it and I'm thinking about writing a book and I actually met with a cousin of mine who has been at some point became the foremost oncologist and Netherlands and he says to me there was nothing in my childhood that predicted I had become as successful as I have become and I'd say there's nothing in my childhood to be predicted as someday I've divided best-selling book is actually things keep happening as things keep growing and what can we do for our kids to believe in them to believe in them and to believe in them and to encourage them to explore the world and to take risks and to say you can always come home is it not work but go and really help against to feel safe in our affection and safe enough they're willing to go take risks are there they know on some deep level I can always go home and be taken care of but once you've once I'm safe you don't stay home anymore you've got that that sort of nasty to come back but I see a lot in traumatized people they stay close to home because they're scared ball be already talked about it with attachment but the more scared you are the less risk you're able to take the less you're able to break away from your tribe even if your tribe is a terrible tribe what about if your tribe is a helpful supportive tribe and you want to stay near that tribe and you want to stay near that tribe it's really fascinating this for me because we do have now one of the things that's massively changed from let's say a few hundred years ago you versus me you're still close to your family and live far away from it exactly it's fascinating and again not or wrong just kind of interesting as to we know having a strong supported tribe around us is very it can be very nurturing but it can also be problematic it also drives you crazy depending on the relationship you have anyway this is this is it is deeply fascinating one of the things you said earlier best which I think relates to this part of the conversation is that you've witnessed people who've had that really safe secure upbringing and you said in that environments the people around them were highly attuned to them I believe that pretty much anything good in life or the most important things in life come from our ability to be present absolutely if as a father I can be present with my kids and hear them and listen to them not easy no not easy being present is I if being present with the people around you if being present as a parent is one of the most important gifts you can give your children I imagine that being traumatized makes it harder for you to be present Darwin pointed out already 1872 he says if you get stuck in fight or flight which is sort of definitely of trauma it interferes with your reproductive capacities and it works against you on the evolutionary basis because in order to create new life you need to give up your fight flight to be totally there for the offspring and if you can not be there for your offspring and it fell to amazing and that's true if you're traumatized and you see it all the time you freeze with your kids you cannot be there for your kids you cannot be taught one of my joys in my life is to see my son I'm not sure how Google father was but he has two kids and I just love watching him be just love watching him be totally attuned to his kids. And I don't totally take credit for it, but I'm really glad that my kid is really attuned to his kids. , it's beautiful. Wow. Hey, Bess, you really are someone who has done such incredible work over the years, both directly with your patients, through your research, but also through publishing this incredible book that still continues to make an impact and I hope will do for many, many more years to come. I first of all want to acknowledge you and thank you for everything you've done for the greater good of humanity. I've just hung up with the people, ? , , it is pretty incredible nonetheless. And to finish off, if there's someone who stumbled across this podcast or they've been on YouTube and they've just come across this and they heard those signs that you mentioned earlier on about the things that may indicate that they have some unresolved trauma, and they're , , I reckon that's me, I want to start somewhere, but I don't know where to start, what would your words to them be? , choosing, finding good therapists is very difficult. I know this from my own experience also, I've also gone to therapists that were no good. But, word of mouth is the best. If you tell me, I went to this trainer and I just made a big difference. I trust your judgment more than the credentials that people have, number one. really good personal recommendation of people say, , to really help me is the best thing. In the US, people call me from all over the US, I say, go on the website of American Psychologist, which is a website, and find people who are -trained in at least three different methods. Because anybody who says I'm a Freudian is a cult person. Freud is more important to you than the welfare of your patients. I'm offending a lot of people by what I just said. And a lot of those therapists tend to become religious people. They know one method and they start saying, this method is the best method. And you have to go to somebody who is very good in a variety of methods, hopefully one having to do with the body. I think EMDR is very helpful for many people and very easy to do. Can you just briefly explain what it is? For somebody that's never heard that. EMDR is eye movement desensitization. It's a very strange method of I've studied very thoroughly that helps you to dampen the memory somewhat. And the other thing that you did, IFS, I think is a very helpful fundamental thing to do in people, . to do with people, . to do with people, . to do with people, with people. I think that knowing something about somatics, knowing something about EMDR type method and something IFS is likely to lead you in the direction. , I just wanna touch on what you said about someone who knows at least three different modalities. You can take that out of the trauma world and I think you can apply that to many things. for example, the movement coach who I work with, who's incredible, she has trained in many different modalities over the years. she is able to use different methods for when, she has a huge toolbox she can use the tool. And I kind of feel, I'm very proud to be what I would call an expert generalist. I think we've got super specialized, but I love being a generalist who can go, oh, with this person, I feel these things are gonna help you with this person. This person, this is gonna help you. And I think we all have, please. The other thing that I recommend to people is ask whoever you go to, has what you're going to do to me, has it been helpful to you? . And if people say no, because I'm not messed up and you are, walk immediately out of that office because nobody escapes bad things in our lives. . And I'm glad that you talk about your own therapy experiences. You strike me as a very put together guy. And that things inside of you that also needs help. And people who don't know that they need help themselves, are not good therapists. Anybody who knows anything, knows that we all are coping with really difficult, they know life is easy. That every life is difficult and be sure that whoever you see knows that life is difficult. And you don't want people to talk about their own trauma, get away from it also. But if people can say, this has really been helpful to me also. That's a very important thing. And just finally, Bessel, if someone because of where they live or their financial situation, cannot have the funds or the means to find someone or see someone, what are some things that they can do themselves to start them on the road to recovery? I think anything that gets you in sync with other people is helpful. , it's no accident that after national disasters, people get together and sing in cathedrals. Singing together is very powerful. Moving together with other people is powerful. I would imagine even joining a bowling league would be helpful for people. You're saying that because you're in Oxford at the moment, maybe. I don't know, are there bowling leagues here? I don't know. Did you say, I thought you said bowling. Oh, I thought you said boating. No, no, bowling. Bowling, . Do something together in a group. Do something together. My friend who you may have met, he went to Eton and he said he was privileged. I know his background. His mother died when he was one years old. Very painful background. He says, but the one thing I got from Eton, we were always playing together and doing sports together. And if you can do that, that's great. Or making music with other people, cooking with other people. Anything that gets you in a synchronous relationship with people around you is very good for you. Faisal, you're doing great work in the world. It's been a real honor for me to have my second conversation with you on the show. Thank you. Thank you much. It's a pleasure, pleasure. If you enjoyed that conversation, then I think you are really going to enjoy this one. If I were to choose to live my life over again, I wouldn't live it in this way. I wish I hadn't worked hard. When you're driven to work too hard, you actually ignore what matters. And where does that come from? Again, that comes from childhood trauma.