I mentioned to you that this is episode 1000. . It's been seven and a half years. We just crossed a billion views the other day as . Congrats, man. And as a little surprise to you, we wanted to take you back to an environment that you probably know at least a little bit . , Cooper's Place, Alberta, Canada, where we shot it. We planted, production planted all those cornfields too. They're as far as the eye could see. And this is the road Cooper drives up on the way out. And that's that Hans Zimmer countdown. 10, 9, 8, leaving children to follow a dream. Lift off. I love how quick that is, that transition from him leaving to going. I think that's cool. . I think it was, , Chris's version of tying the human drama. What would you do a father leaving children to go do what they know they were meant to do and leave this earth and then from there on time changes. . At the end of this shoot, when it was wrapped and it was clear, we had no more shots, no more scenes on this location. My family and I were in my Airstream on the set. It was where we lived. We got, , at the edge of base camp, we turned our Airstream to face out to the mountains. And behind us is your medical and your food, whatever you need from production. But we stayed extra few days and just hiked it and stuff. And one of the things that was fun is I let my son probably, I don't know what leave I was seven, eight at the time. We got in my truck and I let him drive through these cornfields. It's fast. He replicated just when he was going 360 and all around. Cause I had checked, I was , they go, no, it's for as far as you can see. It's just the salt flats hit it. And I've got some video of that and some pictures. It was top. . Unreal. Why do you say life rhymes? I think Mark Twain said that first, didn't he? A version of that history rhymes. , seems for as much as we go. Our generation is different than the last one. And there's never been anything this. The ebbs and the flows, the debits and the assets. And for every new technology and old, there's a debit and an old culture. And, , it seems it always is there, somewhat equalized and balanced. And then there's a rhyme in that, that sort of Ecclesiastes. Ecclesiastical, , there's a time for everything and for every thing you reap that will you sow. There's a time to kill. There's a time to live. There's a time to plant. There's a time to gather. It's a time to spread. It's very Emersonian too, , and, , for every new technology, we lose an old culture, , and these, these things that we think are contradictory, heaven and hell, hate and love. That we think are this and imbalance for the truth of them, I think is in that third eye where they overlap and they all do overlap. They all sort of balance themselves out. And I don't know how much new under the sun we actually are doing. I think we call it different names. I think we change the labels. I think you get some things that are extra strength and some things that are unleaded, but I think they all pretty much balance, pretty much balance out and there's rhyme and balance. What's your perspective on coincidence? In life. . Serendipity. , man. , first time I have it as deja vu and you have it twice, I call it vu deja. Let's flip that thing around upside and backwards, both sides of the coin. , look in some ways it's the beginning of an argument for God, a divine plan, , fate, karma. In other ways. I don't mean karma. I mean, that's fun to start doing that math to try and prove our way there. But it's also feels those are the swing backs. Oh, I've been here before. , I was here before. This life, it doesn't have the period at the end of it. I mean, who knows how many, , many lives, many masters. I don't know if that's true. It just sure makes it sure feels it is sometimes. , that's a rhyme. It's a real nice real time when life does rhyme and you look and you look for the math and you look for the science, add it up and it ain't there. And that way I do think science is the practical pursuit of God, which will never prove. And that's the point. there you have belief and faith for that, which can't be proven. But the pursuit of that is also why I think God loves an atheist scientist. It's , yes, keep it up. Pursuit of that is. Why I think in my agnostic years where I said self-reliance it's on me, man, forget fate. I'm not relying on God. I ain't praying for nothing. It's on me. Responsibility, self-reliance. I believe that when I came back to my faith, that I heard God applauding. Thank you for having your hands on the wheel. Thank you for taking the self-reliance and saying it is on you. Cause what? I need that. What's that? Wonderful idea. I think it's a wonderful idea that God doesn't want to do everything. Some of it's up to you. Amen. And though free will and faith and self-reliance and faith, they can seem contradictory, but I don't, I don't, I don't, I think they're the, I think they do rhyme and you need both. And we, yes, there's a time for it. Inshallah. God willing, there's a time for, , if it's supposed to be, it will be. . Usually after it happens, ? . I think George Janko says every man knows God when he's at his lowest, that there are reliable times when people turn toward faith. And how many people turn at the end of their life. And I wonder, , if there is a God, is that in the same way that, , Catholicism could say sin all week, but if you read, if you meet it and you ask for forgiveness on Sunday, you're washed clean. , I see some people use that as a crutch and go back to repeat offending. I've got a poem in here. I'm going to forgive me, father, for I know what I do. And I'm curious, , is that ? To just, what's that mean? Meaning there's the forgive me, father, for I know not what I do. And I'm writing about, , forgive me, father. There's times I know exactly what I'm doing and I do it anyway. . That was an error of volition, not accident. A choice I made. . Now, if I'm going to keep making that choice and be a repeat offender, I'm not ready to go. . But if I ask for forgiveness on Sunday, I'm all clean. We can do it all over again. I'm not ready to, I'm going to, no, no, no, no, hang on. I'm God, the buck's got to stop here, man. If you're a repeat offender, God's going, , no, you're not going to sit there and tomfoolery with me here, bud. And I don't want to do that with myself. Just as if I steal from you and I come to you and I go, I'm sorry. That was, I was, I don't know where I was. I was at a horrible choice. I'm sorry. I'm asking for your forgiveness. Forgive me. Because you take the, my sincere want of reconciliation. The first thing on the docket between us should be me starting to do anything and everything I can not to have to come to you and say, I'm sorry for the same damn thing again. If I do it once, twice, I'm a repeat offender and I stole from you three times, I think, and I'm hoping you'll still forgive me, but I wouldn't trust me. ? . I think. . I think that's something that we forget sometimes is that once you do the forgiving, which let's go, let's let's the spite move out of us. we don't get sick with that. The first thing responsibility is on the one who's asking for forgiveness to do everything they can not to have to come to ask for forgiveness or say, I'm sorry again. And I think we forget that's, that's on that's, that's the debit. That's that's what's owed by the offender. First. . . he called me to say, I forgive you. he called we, that doesn't mean to even money. That means I got work to do to make sure I'm not coming back to ask for it again. As opposed to, as opposed to, there is no amount of work that you can do that will ever get you back to even keel. It's someone saying, . The ledger is still imbalanced, but the doors open to the bank. The doors and it's on me to go come and repay. Look, I wish rehabilitation the jail system. I wish it was such that once someone's out. They're , you and me going to apply for a job. They're not scarlet letters on them. , that means our, our system of rehabilitation isn't working. Cause if it works, you should get out. I paid my penance. Now it's even money. . . How do you think about forgiving betrayal? I, I think when I've been betrayed. I, I think. I. When it's clearly betrayal, I know is betrayal and that person can look and go, , that's what I did. , I've been asked for forgiveness for that before. And I've been also seeing people go, , that's what I did. And they're not asking for forgiveness. They're going. . That's what I did. First response is, , fuck you. The second one is. That's on my mind. It's on my mind. That keeping me up at night, that SOB or whatever that is. I gotta, I gotta, I gotta, I gotta flush that. I gotta wonder why is that on them? I gotta forgive that deed, that person for that deed. And again, not necessarily trust them, but do my best to forgive them. And that can take me a while. And I think that it takes me the most time to, to, to forgive the betrayal is me. When, and if I betray myself. . I'm not blaming yourself. I'm Alzheimer's for what happened to me. Much worse. I think I over Shocked myself. Form a composure Because how it is, man. We forgive too quickly. gift Resilient. Wii Dop. You'd hop up and dust yourself off and go, forgive you. Let's do it again. We do re become repeat offenders because we didn't take the time to put ourselves or feel the guilt of the wrongdoing and pay a little pennants to look at and go, I don't want to I don't want that person to have that sadness or anger with me again, or the world to have that sadness and anger from this. I don't want to feel that again. And that takes some pause to then go, now I forgive myself. Let's carry on and trust and be ready to do the work to say, we're not going to just let that slide anymore. It's not going to be a way to hold myself to a high standard. . Because it didn't pay off because the repercussions sucked. There is a unique sort of circle of hell that is reserved for when you keep on making the same mistake over and over again, that you've done it. You've had to pay the penance, say that you're sorry, and then arrive straight back at the same place. . I think there's a hell in the mirror. Then I think it can become a living hell. I cut that poem in there, Daymares. I love that one. I do too. Nightmares suck, but at least you wake up and they're over. It's the ones that stick with you when you wake up and go through your day that are there. Those are the ones. That's the living hell. . I think that's what you're talking about. And you repeat offend enough, word gets out. Circles gets out. People doubt you. On your approach, you're , , but don't do this. I mean, all of a sudden, you're going places and you got to look over your shoulder. You got to see who's there that it didn't pay back. Who do I owe? What bridge did I burn? What person did I betray to get where I am? That's a life. That's a living hell. , forget that. In the modern world, you can move from city to city. At least you can, in some regard, leave your reputation behind. This is one of the issues of the West, ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . You're 100 . It all comes back to being a very personal act. And what some people would say, oh, that person's acting selfishly. No, they're actually being incredibly unselfish, I think, because they're pinning themselves in the living hell and having to look in the mirror and going, I don't trust you. I don't respect you. Now, how long? And I know some people that can sleep quite with that existence. I don't know how long they can do it. It's bound to be some come up. It's the world's got to get small. They got to get dizzy somewhere. But, , where's that come from? Where's that come from for an agnostic, an atheist? Where's that come from someone in power that could easily damage somebody but chooses not to be cruel and they could easily? Why not? What's that moral compass of some sort of fairness or integrity that keeps someone having that kind of character? Even though they may not believe. And God or religion. That's why I'm saying this is about belief. , the book's about belief. That's what I'm peddling here. I need more of it. I personally believe in God. But the whole thing is not for people that just believe in God. Believe in believe in trying to pursue your better self, transcend itself. If you believe in the future, you believe in your kids, believe in the past something. Don't know what that is. Ask yourself what you die for. Start there. Everyone kind of believes in something. There's an argument that even nihilists do believe in nothing. Nothing's even something. ? I don't know how you double down on nothing, but. Double nothing. . There's a an opposite end to this scale as that continuing to sort of betray yourself. Sometimes you can do everything and still not get the result that you wanted. And that seems a really tough pill to swallow for people. I think that's why people become uncomfortable with fully filling their emotions. . . Where do you go? What do you think when I really, I gave it my all that I bad myself and I still got kicked in the nut. . Not only did I feel I deserve it, I feel I earned it and I still didn't get it. Wait a minute. But you said that's the playbook and I followed the playbook. You said these were the rules and the regulations. I followed it and I was good at it. I still didn't get it. , I suppose that's why we have entrepreneurs and criminals. And I mean, I have to, I think I naturally come back and look, I, I, I hustle. I'm a hustler. I, I'm not puritanical. I'm not making, I'm not, I'm not trying to preach an absolute straight and narrow way to go things. I bullshit my way into things and faked my way into making things. I pulled off stunts, but I, I, I've never been able to really live with by hook or by crook. I'll get it how I can get it. I'll lie, cheat and steal to get it. I got the prize and I'm still . I got it. My own shadow chases me down in the middle of the night and those nightmares do become my own daymares. Now the getting going for it and not getting it. Which we see a lot now, now, I think we're living in times where one of the indirect examples we'll see and seeing from leaders, some leadership is who's got the power? The winner. . what are the ethics? , whatever the winner does. , but the winner pillaged and lying and cheating, just told him to get the prize. But he won. Wait a minute. You moved the goalposts while I had the ball was in the air, man. Is that ? They won. And to, I'm not buying to say I'm not ready to purchase that. . That's just how it is. , and I'm in no way foolish enough to think that everybody out there is on their best behavior. No, me neither. , but I'm not ready for just, Hey, however you can pull it off and however many people you crumple along the way, there ain't no rules regulations. Oh, and actually, if you do follow the rules. Ha. You're a sucker. Fuck you. What's the game for them? We're going to get dizzy on that. That's going to self implode. That's going to be, that's not the wild west. That's more than that. That's upside down and backwards and the foots on the other shoe. That's not going to last. That does that, that, that, that doesn't have any R a long-term ROI for us personally or collectively as humanity. I don't think . We've got to police that ourselves. ? And I think that's my. The hunch is that we start with that. Everyone, no matter how much they're thinking globally or collectively, it all starts with something very, very personal. And that's where a revolution will could begin. A revolution of evolution would begin that each person goes, I've got to go one step further. As I talk about salvage my character or one step further before I pulled parachute quit. I think that would, that's how. -. Really inch forward and evolve. In a way. Before we continue, you are probably not eating and a fruit and vegetables and it, and this is going to help good news. AG one just released their next gen formula. It's a more advanced clinically backed version of the product that I've been drinking every day for years, delivering more than 75 ingredients, including a multivitamin pre and probiotics, super foods, greens, and more. And for the first time ever, they've now added flavors, tropical. Citrus and Berry available in the U S and Canada. . You still get the same one scoop ritual, but now with an even more thoughtful formulation flavors and four clinical trials behind it designed with absorption and maximum efficacy in mind. AG one's been evolving since 2010, continuously improving along with the latest research and AG one next gen is the result. It's clinically shown to help fill common nutrient gaps and support gut health. Even in people who already eat in one study, it boosted healthy bacteria in the gut by 10 times. And if you're still not sure they've got a 90 day money back guarantee. you can buy it. And try it every single day for three months. And if you don't it, they will give you your money back now. You can get a year's free supply of vitamin D three K two free AG one travel packs and that 90 day money back guarantee by going to the link in the description below or heading to drink. AG one.com slash modern wisdom. That's drink. AG one.com slash. Modern wisdom. Let's say someone has been kicked in the nuts a good bit by life. How do you advise them to sort? Of become the hero of their own story again? Man, that's a tough one. I got a. I'm going to pull in here called heaven or not. I'm trying to find it and see if this kind of half answers that question. And. , I don't have. That answer a lot of times these. Here it is heaven or not. . Tomorrow is not today's measurement. When the misery is bad enough. ? These people don't have to the suffering. Consideration. Is a privilege, man. I'm trying to put food on the table now and pay my rent tonight. You want to talk to me about investing in my future? Oh, . And I say, and that's part of what faith and religion are for. To help those in misery. Hang on to a hope that will most likely not be served them in this life. To sell them belief and faith that they will be served in the next. And what if there is? There is. There is nothing there, man. What if there's nothing to hope for? What if there's no next? I don't know. But either way. In misery here or without a heaven there. Not having any hope or faith in anything is a certain way to remain where you are. Forever. But if you can find something that you can keep going. Something that no matter how small to look forward to and continually have faith in and chase. , then your life here is going to be better. Now. Heaven or not. That's a great question. , I sit here. With a life where I have the luxury. To project. To ask myself and ask others. No, make a sacrifice today. Sacrifice a plastic ring today for a gold crown tomorrow. Sacrifice something today for more freedom tomorrow. Sacrifice something today for a possible healthier future for your kids. I understand that's a luxurious picture. But. I'm in a position. I'm not going to apologize that I'm in. I'm in it. But I understand to someone in misery. They're going. Good for you, man. I'm trying to feed the family tonight. I'm not thinking past that. I can't think past that. What do you ask them. To do. , my indirect. Thing I would say and understand is. , if you don't have the hope or believe in something you're going to end up. You're going to definitely got to remain where you are. And if you have hope and faith in something. You're going to end up. You're going to end up. You're going to end up. You're going to end up. You're going to end up. You're going to end up. You're going to end up. You're going to end up. You're going to end up. I'm not saying it's 100 get out of jail. You're going to absolutely get out. But you got the best chance to. Peace is a gift of God and grace. To reach it. We must rage. Rage. . . I'm going to close my show. That I'm doing when I'm this little bit with the tour with this. With that. Because. Amen. Kumbaya. Home. I'm going to close my show. I'm going to close my show. I'm going to close my show. I'm going to close my show. Come to get it. I don't think that's how peace is coming. I think that's a great place. To. Hope for, but to get there. Or closer to there. It's going to take punk rock. A rage. It's going to take getting wild. It's not gonna be necessarily. logical it's not going to be tame it's not going to be whispered i don't think it's going to take nothing no emotion gets more shit done than rage for good or for bad it seems rage really moves the needle what i mean and i think that emotion and that approach shouldn't be thrown out when you're talking about a pursuit of peace or contentment i think it takes sweat equity it would take blood being drawn i don't believe that we're as evolved enough species to as to just behave as we intellectually can agree we should be i don't see it happening you can all agree with it in an open forum enough of us go back on our own and make what we're doing it's a good idea but boy we're cornered and what we gots being possibly trespassed on be very primal some lines need to be drawn i believe i wonder whether we overpraise balance when greatness might demand imbalance that's an interesting one that's a fun one man do we overpraise balance i think my first reaction would be we do overpraise balance a bit it's a great pursuit i think a better pursuit is try and find the rhyme in the imbalance let me give you what i think is the justification for why balance gets overpraised most of the people who have a platform which is sufficiently big with enough credibility for others to listen en masse yay have been through the rage and now burst out the top to reach exit velocity and what that means is they're in a very different position now to what they were at the beginning and the summary is model the rise not the result i that model the rise not the result because the result is where they're at now do not ask warren buffett about how long he spends reading the newspaper and pouring over old books that guy was a hustler he was a hustler when he was young what i mean i think that's a good point i think that's a good point i think that's a good point i think that's a good point i think that's a good point and the best part of that is that you can point out that they're focused on those resources that they've built and it's the delighted since George was aproductive nah i'm gonna get on to it this morning too because i got to say that i named that i got to have it but your other tweet was interesting i really wanted to hear that because i'm impressed bro cause you're already known and i'm thank you man the story was inspiring i got theotal commercialize reach ichigo stuff mon teleskop in cenice sea world resolutions to spreadamerica being spotted in the sudanese waits to hear slang or some random code pun in one pararya and my point is don't you 156 00 visitsoutlandship social network is state and labor i mean you're if you say Reddit 17 each placeurch twitter statuette national podcast show chat footprints codework Conf ca which we know there isn't really one, and we cannot imitate someone else's exact result. We're going to have our own way to get there. The approach is all. I think that's the best our life can get is one constant approach and with many different approaches, but knowing there is no result. That's when I always say the metaphor life's a verb, but that's really fun to go, no, no, no, don't study the result. What was the person doing when they got there? And everybody who's achieved something great was some sort of outlaw, some sort of hustler, out of balance, out of whack, dark times. Woo. Astream. Still wakes up in the middle of the night and glad they're wearing a mouth guard because they had to chip to all their teeth with that fucking nightmare they were having about those things they did back then. I'm one of those. , another question would be what virtue is there in balance if there was no such thing as imbalance to fight against? . Oh, I just reached equanimity. . , I walked out onto this tightrope. , exactly. And I don't know. It just, I didn't wobble once. , now we're going into, I have that, I got that thing in there. I said, what's better? Take eight, take eight, eight big risk in life. Sin once, miss the mark once, but get seven, achieve seven, seven out of eight or take a hundred risk. And achieve eight of them. My hunch is that there's a God. He's saying, go for the hundred and get eight rather than eight and get seven. If you're not taking, if you're not taking enough risk to sin or miss the mark, which is what sin means to fail. What are you doing? Don't come back with even money. Don't come back with a safe bet, which that can become a sort of recessive. Peace and namaste. No, it's a, it's a, it's almost a, it's, I don't think it's what the mystics meant when they were , be disattached. I think it mean go embrace, but for highs and lows and pains and pleasures, understand that those outward things are not the things to be attached to for your own identity. You have, it's gotta be inward first. Enjoy those partake, but don't become attached to those for your measure. There's a, an idea from Isaiah Berlin called the inner citadel. He says, , , I'm not sure. , I'm not sure. , when the world denies us that which we want, we retreat into ourselves in a kind of spiritual depth into a sort of inner citadel. Basically, if you can't get what you want, you teach yourself to want what you can get. . , for instance, , you damage your leg in a battle and you can try to fix the leg in which case you're fine. Or if you fail, you chop your leg off and announce that the desire for legs is misguided and must be subdued, ? This is a. This is a treat in spiritual depth. This is, , asceticism on steroids. , I, by not trying to play the game, there is no risk of failure. And I think that the not making any bets. , I, I see this a lot. I've been very obsessed with emotions since we last spoke a year ago. I've been very obsessed with emotions with feeling feelings are trying to, and I get the sense that feelings are one of these strange bets, emotions, investing ourselves, not holding a bit back, not putting one foot out. putting it on the line, opening up, exposing ourselves. And that feels a retreat in kind, but one that's plausibly deniable when we just have one foot out. I didn't fully commit myself to this project, this relationship, this friendship, this, this, , self transformation. I kept one foot back. , , I might, I might not be able to do that now because I've got this challenge or this, this, this restriction from before this relationship, I'm going to hold a bit back. I'm going to keep it for me. This is my bit. And it means that if failure comes along, it doesn't hurt as much, but it also means that success is less likely. And if success comes along, , that you didn't really earn it. You didn't really win it because you played the game and that's fine in some areas of pursuit and at some stages of life, ? Early in life. I don't think he can be left as culpable. You're 12 years old. You don't know what you're doing in business. The outcome really is what matters. That is what you're optimizing for. Some people business is a personal transformation vehicle masquerading as a wealth making pursuit, but for the most part, you're there to do the business. . But in relationships and friendships and the way that you show up for yourself and your personal transformation and your relationship to whatever you believe in, I don't think that we should be having our inner Citadel really play any part. Hard to pull off. , but I've it's leave it similar to what I. . I'm gonna talk about an owner's mentality versus a renter's mentality. many people have the renter's mentality, relationships, businesses, transactional, flip it, get it, flip it. And they never give the relationship the chance to possibly be a friendship, possibly be a long term relationship to possibly be a great mate, great partner. They never give the real estate, the house a chance to actually maybe become a home. . And that's, I think it's the words better that to go in with an owner's mentality, meaning have you ever hired someone that you were , probably just need you for a few months? You have? -. . You have. See, I, I have only hired or people that I was , I'm hoping this is gonna be a lifer. -. I'm hoping. I'm hoping you're gonna provide what I need and I'm gonna get, you're gonna get from me what you need that this could work out forever. Barely any of them do. I've got a couple. -. A few. But that's how you entered the relationship. But I, one, I wouldn't have known, or I wouldn't have got out of them and they wouldn't have got out of me. And if as much, if we wouldn't have gone into it with an owner's mentality. People can tell. This is transactional or transient. Let me ask you this though. Isn't all . Basically. Every. I know it's transactional, transformational. Those seem to be the two is transactional. Every relationship's transactional. -. But not only transactional. Some transactional relations could become transformational, but I mean, we're all using each other in a way that I can get this from you. You give this to me. My wife gives this to me. I give this to her. It's a transformational relationship, but we're always transacting. I don't have the problem with the transaction. I had the pro I, I have, I have the, the whole back when it's , oh, it's merely for transaction. -. Oh, it's merely. -. It's merely for use. And. How many people don't even try to hide that anymore? They're just straight up going that's it. That's that's all this for. What are you talking about? . I mean, I see it in, in, in, in, in, , Palo Alto, man, they raise all kinds of the startups are everywhere and everyone invests and you flip and it falls down and no, and they don't even blink. . And you work for somebody and you become their CEO and they fire you and dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, and the hammer and see it in politics and they hammer your name and drag you through the mud. They're not, , dude, that's just, that's how it is. No problem. Hey, Bob, how you doing? I'm , that's the guy. , that's fine. It's just business. It's just politics. . I'm , hang on a minute. that was that transactional that, that, that's water off the duck's back for you. And for many, it is, I'm amazed at how people do it. They're built different in the same way as doctors and nurses and firefighters. -. People that need to deal with trauma. . , you are dealing with interpersonal trauma. You are, you are a, a soldier on the field of interpersonal battle. -. If you're in politics or if you're in business. . -. You also don't necessarily do what you believe. You do what's expedient or successful or efficacious. You, efficacious, what's that mean? , effective. . . , you betray a lot of people, a lot of ideals, including yourself. -. And, and, and, , it doesn't sound very much fun to me. That's that betrayal part. I wonder if it's inherent or if that's me reading it from the outside and saying, no, that could be different. -. I wonder how much of that is people optimizing for the wrong outcome and only getting to see a very narrow aperture of other people's outcomes too. -. . . -. Or this person seemed to step on some toes and, and, , I don't know. I'm not sure. . -. . . . -. break a couple of arms on their way up. They were . Everyone seems to be all with this. You go, you don't know what the texture of that person's mind's when they go to bed at night. They might not have spoken to their father in five years. They might never feel peace. They might permanently be anxious. They might hate themselves. Might not be able to get an erection. You want that? You really want that? You want this? You want the outside success? The price that people pay to be somebody that you admire is one of the most fascinating questions, I think. . . I'm trying to think. I'm going through my head now. Where have I sacrificed my own character? To get ahead then to be perceived as, and I know I've done it many times. Part of that hustling part I said I've done. , that's the rise. . And being a marketeer too. Gotten away with stuff, played games and da-da-da-da-da. Kiss the fire and walk away whistling. A little Icarus light. . We talk about Icarus last time? No. No, I think we're more in need of Icarus in reverse. Meaning I think, oh, don't get too close to the sun. It's getting hot. It's gonna melt that wax. I think most of us are turning back and it's 45 degrees Fahrenheit. I think too. We got our beanies on. I was , dude, where do we get the arrogance to think that it's actually getting hot? We're not even close, man. Not even close to getting hot. I mean, that close to the sun is way up there. Arrogant prick shit. . . . . You're not even close to getting hot. You're not even close to getting hot. You're not even close to getting hot. You are thinking that you're that close. You didn't even make it near as far as you thought you did. . Or as you could go. I wish more people, I'm gonna flip the word, were more involved with themselves. Embrace your Icarus. Instead of self-involved, that has a bad term. I wish people were more involved with themselves. . I think that's where we're more deficient. Believe in yourself or invest in yourself. Do more of what you can to be great at a career. To be a great craft or a vocation or to get what you want. In other news, if you thought that lemonade couldn't get better, it just did. Element has taken the classic taste of lemonade and actually made it useful and functional, giving your body back the sodium, potassium, and magnesium it actually loses when you sweat. No sugar, no junk, just the stuff that works. And that's why I'm such a huge fan. That was horrendous. You're nowhere near me. Lemonade in an ice cold glass of water. Just . That was better. It's different. Hits different. And they back it with the best policy for money back that I've ever seen. No questions asked. Unlimited duration. If you don't it, they will give you your money back and you don't even need to return the box. That's how confident they are that you'll love it. I keep harping on about it because it genuinely makes a difference. When I use it, I feel the difference. And proper hydration is not just about drinking enough water. It's about having the electrolytes to allow your body to use those fluids. And they offer free shipping within the US. Plus, now you can get a free sample pack of Element's most popular flavors with your first purchase. And you can get that money back guarantee by going to the link in the description below or heading to www.drinklmnt.com slash modernwisdom. That's www.drinklmnt.com slash modernwisdom. in the face. . You thought you could hide back there, didn't you? No, no, no. I see you, man. the story of Sisyphus? The man that was cursed to roll the boulder up a hill for the rest of time by the gods. Huh. This man gets. Cursed. I think he was a demigod. Gets cursed to roll a boulder up a hill. It's a heavy, heavy boulder. He rolls it uphill. And just as he gets to the very top, he stumbles and it falls down and crushes him. . And he needs to walk back to the bottom. Turn around, pick it back up. And Albert Camus' famous line is, we must imagine Sisyphus happy. That this pointless pursuit, that he finds joy in the process of doing it. I wonder if we can imagine Icarus happy. I wonder if we can imagine the guy that is flying toward the sun as, , he had a view that nobody else got from up there. And he only did it once and the wings melted. . But what if he'd run that experiment a few times? And what if he had a little parachute that could have sort of brought him down? , , . You might have realized that was just a one-off and actually, I think you can get closer. , . . , . We must imagine Icarus happy, I think is a cool idea. . And , he regulated his breathing as it got hot and sweaty. He learned. Somebody swung by and he got a backpack with water on him next time. , , . He's the stronger glue. Four feathers. , . He stitched it. what I mean? -. Came down a little more tan than the time before. -. I've always relied on logic to make sense of myself and the world. I've been finding that tougher to do lately. Seems to me the facts have become unreliably overrated. . How ? What is a fact? Where do we go for the facts? What's the truth? Where do we go for that? That's probably a bigger question than what's a fact. I think a fact, I think the facts are an underdog now and I'm not sure where to go to find them. The math doesn't seem to be adding up. I'm not. I'm not looking around much and for the reason I wrote this for my own spiritual therapy, I was going, I found myself getting cynical, looking down my nose, not giving people the benefit of the doubt, stereotype and objectifying full group people and groups. Then the scary part was I started to entertain the idea of. I got a feeling inside. a consistently cool guy, what was he trying to say? It was a thoroughbred but very shiney type of personality. No, because, I mean. What I got was, he missed and there's only this minute left and I think that's from a few questions. What's going on? No. not enough to get off to, let's go to the dream. Let's flip that script. I always have gone from nonfiction to say, let's make that the dream. Just keep living, art emulates life. And that's in the recent years it started to pay me back less. How much does that do with my own eyes? Probably quite a bit, but whatever it is, still seeing it and I wanna fight against it. I flipped it and said, let's go to dreams. Let's go to poems, prayers. These are pursuits of an ideal beauty. These are in between the lines. This is in between the math. This is not academic. This is not intellectual. These are ideals that we pursue. The beginner's mind that we have as a child before we know worse. And I don't wanna be ignorant. I don't wanna be foolishly optimistic. Let's look to those and believe that we can still make those real. Let that bring rhyme to the reason instead of looking to the reason. Reason, rhyme, the rhyme. That's the rhyme communicating with the reason because life around us is all reason, reason, reason, neck up, man. I wanna pull some weeds here on this pathway, open up that, this one lane dirt top road with potholes. And it's a one way going the opposite way, which way I want it to go. It's going away from the heart. Clean that up a little bit and go, let's get you two communicating a little bit. You're not gonna win every time, bud. Cause we got, we our reason. We wanna mind ourself, but we make a decision. We have any kind of certainty or we make a judgment. Let's have this, let's have our heart be a two factor authenticated before we make that decision. And that goes for the compassionate side. That also goes for the consequences and of saying the buck stops here with ourselves and others. How do you advise? How do you advise perennial overthinkers to get below the neck a little bit? Perennial overthinkers. Get below the neck. Oh. Record themselves all overthinking. Have a listen back. I do it. I overthink a lot. And when I've heard myself back, I'm going, dude, you're kind of seeing much significance that none of that shit's significant. Every detailed frame have you're giving it a proper name. Oh, if everything's significant, there's no significance at all, man. Some shit's just , I don't have the capacity to deal with it. I don't really care. It's just how it is. Don't some of the inevitables. And sometimes you gotta let those ride. Go on. I'm not trying to shit. That's just how it is. I'm gonna deal with that. Now I'm gonna deal with what I can deal with. I get the middle midget. I get the middle midget. I get the middle midget. I get the middle midget. I get the middle midget. I get the middle midget. I get the middle midget. I'm gonna deal with that. I'm gonna deal with that. And then I make a number of limitations on that. And I listened to myself back. And I'm going, whoa, you need to get some sleep. You need to have a drink. You need to relax. You need to. I got this funny poem in here. It's called barbiturate logic. Where's barbiturate logic? Can I find this for a second? There it is. I need to call my brain to have half the brain. the thoughts per hour, 50 of the neural fragment, and therefore twice the power. And one doubly meaningful story with half the words. , sometimes the snaps, it's just, it's too much. It's all treble. And if everything is significant, you're , you miss the main thing. I'm missing, focused on the drop. I didn't realize it was raining. It's the force for the tree thing. that's the overthinking. When I've recorded myself, I can hear that there is some lanyab, et cetera, in my talk. And some of it is babble. Some of it may be succinctly fine-tuned and wonderful. Then I have to go, is that useful to my understanding? Is it useful to the story I can tell? Is it useful to my application in life? And a lot of times I'm , no, it's clever. It's smart shit. I don't want to spend too much time in that head because that sounds , , you broke a sweat in places you weren't really getting exercise, mentally, spiritually, or physically. that can sometimes, listening back has helped me baseline some things and kind of slow the brain down, man. You're missing, give more meaning. And you hear, the smartest people, man, I love hearing the wisest people. Their stuff's short, bro. It's quick and you go, oh. You're waiting for more. And you're looking around and they're , look, and she's , oh, that's it. And you're , perfect. My dad telling me when I wanted to go to film school instead of law school, and I thought he was going to go, you want to what? Him taking that pause and saying, is that what you want to do? And I said, yes, sir. And him going, , don't half-ass it. I was waiting for much more. That was it. And there's no, that was it. Nothing better he could have told me at that time. , it's also, I think, remembering when we overthink things or over-explain things, you're stealing a lot of times in moments that you think maybe you're teaching, even ourselves, especially others, you're stealing the dignity of leaving the truth in the asker's kitchen. letting someone come up with, have a conversation, but you're letting them come up with. And that's the answer. It's what the best directors do in films. They don't tell you what to do. They talk about and get you to go, oh, oh , to, and they go, it is as you say. Then we got ownership. Then that's our idea. Whether we were manipulated into it or not, we're going, thank you, it's mine. Now we got fire. Now we got purpose. Now that you get the great performance in front of the camera and I think in life more too. When person feels they came up with the idea. I always tell directors, man, I'm easy to direct. Just don't tell me what to do. And if you can, trick me into thinking all this shit's my idea. . . There's a wonderful insight about why we people that's similar to that. inverse charisma. A lot of the time we think that we want to be more charismatic because that would make us more likable. We want to. We want our stories to be engaging and our aura to be electrifying and our presence to be magnetic and for us to walk into a room and for everybody to sort of look up, be compelled. And then I looked at the friends that I liked spending time around the most and they're interesting, but that wasn't really the common denominator. Some people are interesting and some people make you feel interesting. -. And there's this wonderful story about Jenny Jerome, Winston Churchill's mother, and she gets to meet Benjamin Disraeli and William Gladstone on consecutive nights for dinner. And she leaves the first dinner, says, I left that feeling he was the cleverest man in all of England. She goes to the second one. She says, I left that dinner feeling I was the cleverest woman. And this wonderful idea that some people are interested in, ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . It's interesting. Oh, I remember that. I'm trying to remember the what happened in England. . . . . . I think what he said was, , bien. Keep going. Just keep walking here and there. . . . I mean, he was aiming to say , he wasn't trying to keep off him and stuff that. . . . . That's love, by the way, but don't My kids would be , can you give us some of the Ted Talk, Dad? I'm , , shut up. Sit down, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. I've got slides. Listen, . I have a presentation. No, I don't know, let him find it and . I had a cool trick and it was just simple. But one, in talking and sharing something that you've learned that you think may be applicable to other people, the use of I, you, or we, to use the we, you is dangerous, because people are , you're talking at me, you're telling me what to do. I is safe because, , that's your experience. Maybe you invite, maybe people see themselves in it or not, but to say we, it's closer to platitudinal because you're going , are you speaking for all of us? But it does welcome everybody in. And it says that, and I always to say this when I'm talking about things with people, I'm , when I say we, I'm including me, all ? Because I'm not- We includes me. We includes me. I'm not, I'm working on this shit too, man. ? And trying to, and , I have to be reminded, don't be afraid to ask the question that I'm asking for myself that can open up someone else to go, , I got an answer to that. What do you got? Did it similar with the kids last night. Instead of saying, Vida, Levi, Livingston, how are you doing? It's a tough question to answer. I said, and my friend gave me this note, said, hey, what's a life of a teenager these days? They took off and talked and shared all kinds of stuff because I wasn't putting them on the spot or they didn't take it as putting on the spot. I found it much more about how they're feeling by asking- It's a broad question. Broad question. , , , . ? , it's funny how we need license for that. . In a strange way. . To be able to talk about, is a lot of times how we best talk about ourselves but couched with enough distance. . I've noticed, I have seen, it's the, I'm asking for a friend justification. . , , . What do you think about the role of courage in life? , we've talked far about the balance of doing it but not doing it. We've talked about dreaming big and maybe dreaming even further. And then we've also had this idea of a little bit of relinquishing of control as we've got to apply the effort, we've got to have the vision, but we've also got to know when we're going to let go a little bit. It seems to me courage, the ability to feel our convictions and commit to them is a little bit of a common thread that sort of runs through those. . I grew up only knowing sort of the courage of the persistence. Be resilient, endure, get up, dust yourself off, go. The problem with that, the Achilles heel with that is if you get up and get the courage to keep on going every time and get up and dust yourself off, you make the same mistakes each time around because you never backed up. To have what I've now learned and still learning is that. The courage to go, no, I'm going to let some people pass me in the race now because I'm going to look at why I keep stepping in that damn same pothole and twist my ankle, the same spot. Why I keep failing when I try to get that next spot in this relationship or failing in this place to get this product of my craft to the next level. Would that be the relinquishing of the rom-com era in a small part for you? Small part, . , that was one. It also has to do with when I got married. . . My son comes to me at four years old and says, why isn't my mama kind of, hey, I'm going to go ahead. You're fucking four, dude. I sat there. I was , did your mom put you up this? Great question. I mean, we're not because we're not married. When you get married, switch your name. . And then he just listened. And all of a sudden he goes, why are you scared? Fucking four years old, dude. And I'm , . I guess I am. I remember going to a pastor and talking to a lot of different elder men who had long-term relationships, were married for decades and stuff. And my pastor goes, let me just ask you this, Mr. Risk-Taker, what's the bigger risk? Carrying on? you're going? And it's going . Or taking the deeper dive into the sacrament covenant of marriage. It should be a covenant between you and her and God. The trilogy will go forward. That will be a whole new adventure in itself. What's the bigger risk? I was , oh, getting married is a bigger risk. He was , he didn't say another word. That was part of why I made the affirmative action and was what I was looking for. It's a way to play offense with that choice. I didn't want to do it because, oh, it's what you're supposed to do. It's time. We've been dating for this long. We got engaged. I didn't want to do it by the book. And I was looking for the authentic reason to do it. And that did help me with that. But the rom-com time, that was definitely me doing the work I was doing and only being able to do the work I was doing and offer the roles I was getting the rom-coms was eating at me. I felt I could. Life is good, man. I make good money. I feel I can roll out of bed and do one of these tomorrow morning. That's cool. Man, I'm kind of number one. I'm the go-to guy for this. But I wasn't. I was countered by I had met Camilla, fallen in love. She's now pregnant with her first child. that, my life was extremely vital. And I was alive, cried harder, laughed louder, felt more joy, all those things. But my work was , all . And I was , , I wish my work could be as challenging or as vital as my life. And I remember looking in the mirror going. We'll be glad now. Appreciate that it's not the other way around. But can I have my work challenge my lifestyle in this vitality? , if I do some dramas I want to do. , those aren't coming. All , if I can't do what I want to do, let me quit doing what I was doing. Now, that was, I think, , it was definitely courageous. I did honestly think I'd written myself a one-way ticket out of Hollywood. People close to me, basically almost everybody, besides my wife, was , what is your major malfunction, little brother? You got it made. Why are you throwing a jackknife in this? You're tripping yourself running downhill, man. You did it. I had my wife and myself to remind myself of that 4 a.m. clarity that I had in tears when I was , no. I'm rolling the dice. I'm sticking with it. And , man, I did think I wrote myself a ticket out of Hollywood. I did look at other vocations, become a teacher, a wildlife guide. I seriously looked at those things. But over time, and it was about 20 months, it was gone long enough, had found anonymity enough, was not in your living room, in a theater, in a rom-com. You didn't seem on a beach shirtless. Where is he? And then I think I told you the story. Turning down the 14.5 million offer made people go, oh, shit, what's he up to? You don't just step out of Hollywood unless you get, you turn that down because you got a plan. You got somewhere you want to go. And I think that made me more attractive. There's a new novel idea. But that was, , that risk took, I think it's fair to say that took a fair amount of courage from me. A quick aside, if you've been feeling a bit sluggish, your testosterone levels might be the problem. They play a huge role. In your energy, focus, and performance. But most people have no idea where theirs are or what to do if something's off, which is why I partnered with Function because I wanted a smarter and more comprehensive way to understand what's actually happening inside of my body. Twice a year, they run lab tests that monitor over 100 biomarkers, and they've got a team of expert physicians that analyze the data and give you actionable advice to improve your health and lifespan. Seeing your testosterone levels and dozens of other biomarkers charted over the course of a year with actionable insights to actually improve your health and lifespan. with Blooper, you have a much better plan if you get your test in early October. Anyway, see you in the office! Oh, aprove and rest very and please remember to leave this video now, be sure to watch my next video where I share my updates and what you take into consideration when you have breathing difficulties. Bye. lot of people their work feels more vital than their life is that a shiny object mirage that they need to rid themselves of if you can and you're willing to look that's part of why i started writing the script flipped on me five years ago i was i was feeling my work was more vital than my life i felt i was going through the motions more in my life but i was really getting major life experiences and through my work and i had the same question i was let's see where i can challenge myself more in the documentary the one life i'm living rather than the characters i'm going to play that somebody else wrote someone else directing someone else is lensing through their camera and editing what are we doing on this one take the day we're born and we'll be cut the day we die and that was a challenge to myself which led to the writing which was a more direct experience kind of put a word down without it's my script and without my performance on it without music without pictures and that was an inward journey that i'm that i'm still on and now i think i'm trying to want to do both of them i just did a couple movies jeez i was reminded how much i love it that's been my older yes actually when i was filming liveaching's Platinum mostly it was called 5000 i'm gonna call it the end of 1000 but this film is about everybody and it's almost i'm contacted from world ne nnst and ask for extensive information get confused of course not already thanks for watching my life i love cadaver which is just amazing do today,contact me on my Cypher or myhi cer Italy, I'm happy to make a reaction in c prosecution of that chapter. liketat. I hope you made it. bein' done was that was much fun, and I'm trying to do a screenplay, I put a few times, and I've enjoyed doing it. in Europe, I would get to lean on somebody who liked doing this, doing something each day actually was quite a ton applause on our character in casually, and we couldn't because recently, has led me to question myself, maybe I need to learn how to vacation differently. That's also a skill. . I hear True Detective season two, maybe coming back. That would be season probably five. I've heard- Season two with you. , Nick's got an idea, pits a lot of the creator, and he's brought it up to Woody and I, we've talked about it, and he says he's got a line on it. And we both said, awesome, show us. And that's as far as this is gone. I think we've talked about that. I missed that. I loved that series. It was my favorite thing to watch on TV. And I happened to be in it, but I just was, I loved it. I watched it every Sunday night, everybody else. And in a series, it was the first time, especially now, because things are getting abbreviated. The first acts of stories are getting abbreviated more and more, I'm finding. And I don't know if this is because, oh, people's attention span are shorter, just introduce characters, and let's get on with the conflict. But act two starts on page 12. It used to start on page 37, 38. And now it starts on page 12. And I'm , man, the actor's favorite part is act one, because that's where we're going, , maybe you've seen it before, but you hadn't seen it with me. You hadn't gone on this journey with this character. Let me introduce you before the conflict arises to this world and this character, and my behavior, my relationship. you can go on a journey with us, with me, , , you can go on a journey with us, with me, , , you've never gone through this before. , those are getting reduced. The series of True Detective, eight series, eight hour episodes, man, I got three hours. I got 190 pages of an act one. That's a luxury and a beautiful thing to have, to sit there and go, . , and it took me a lot of patience, because I almost made some choices. I remember sitting there after a month in thinking , I think what I'm doing may be really boring. And I was , no, trust, trust when, when Rust becomes Crash, it's gonna flip. Trust to get in there. But I was sitting there going, I don't know. And I was going to Nick and Carrie on it. Is this boring, what I'm doing? They were , no, stick with it. I was , . I go, you see stuff bubbling underneath? They're , . I was , , because I'm getting antsy. ? if that came along and it was the script, it'd be a great collaboration again. Tell you what I had on the show last week in London, Bugsy Malone. And he was telling me a few stories about what he learned working with Guy Ritchie. . What have you learned working with Guy? Guy is great in the moment. But you ask Guy to work on anything or talk about what we learned for dinner tonight, and it may be six o'clock. That's too far in the future. That son of a gun. He wrote the script. And I go in and my character had great monologues and great things to say. And it takes a lot of work to work on those things and work and understand them. And I'd show up on the day and he'd always sit down, now let's hear it. And he'd be over there listening. And all of a sudden he'd be , oh God, what did you say? Oh, geez. What was that line there? Oh God, that's rubbish. Who wrote that? , you did. He's , oh God, that's shit. what? Ba-da-ba-ba-ba-ba. And he starts spitting. . Not different lines. And he's rewriting on the day, before you're supposed to do the scene. Not the morning of, and definitely not on a Sunday before the week. I'd ask him to meet me on Sunday to go with the script. He stood me up every time. Every time. But you get on set and now he's in it. And the stuff he comes up with live, where I went from frustration to , oh. Because 95 of the stuff he comes up with live is better than what was there. And I started going. I started to go, . It's a meter. It's a musical meter of speech patterns that he's hearing. And pop, pop. And there's no in any of his stuff. It's sharp. ? It's noun verb, nonverb, noun verb, maybe an adjective, adverb, and they're somewhere. Period. Bam. Pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop. And he hears it in the moment. And again, he's funny. He'll call out something that you'll think I thought was some of this genius stuff he wrote. And he'd be , oh God, that shit. Who wrote that? And I'm , , you did. He's , , that's rubbish. Throw it out. Throw it out. And he starts fresh. He's the freestyle rapper of the director world. . And I loved it. After I got past frustration, I mean, I enjoyed him and working with him, enjoyed him before I enjoyed working with him. And then I understood the way he worked and continued to enjoy him and enjoyed working with him. I really enjoyed working with the guy. And the way his mind works, his attention when it's live, when it's time. Now we're in it. Now we're at the table. We are all here to share. We're all here to shoot the scene. Let's sit down now and read through this and how it sounds. But you want to do this an hour before? You want to do this back of the trailer? -. . -. That's exciting. That's a tightrope. . I had to go between, , what's worth learning anything in the damn script to no, no, no, no, no, no. , there's certain things. Of course. You've been reading this thing the night before thinking, I know 50 of this is going to be thrown out tomorrow. 60, ? But I said, when you look and you hear it, and you go, in the moment, you go, that is better. . And the hard part is after you hear it's better and you agree it's better, it's , , let's shoot it. And they're , , hang on. I need to. It was a lot. Let me have a look at it. what I mean? Let me try and at least memorize some of it. . . Apparently you've shot at Stray Vista before. Did you have a cactus? Did you have a? I had many cactuses in many places that had a cactus. I was telling a story to someone a couple of days ago. I think it's the picture on the back of the book where my Airstream is there. I believe that's in Utah. And I remember that place because I pulled off the side of the road about 5 PM one afternoon, and I went on this dirt road through this camp that was crystal meth. They were hacking it up in the wandering eyes and the twitches. They were all out there watching me pull in. And I had learned from being on the road enough that it was me and my dog that when you go and some possible danger in the people that are around, you've got to watch how you get out. You've got to watch how you drive. You've got to watch how deliberately you back that thing up. You've got to watch how you get out of the car, how you walk deliberate, how you get your shoulders back. And you also, it's a good idea to grab the baseball bat and do some stretches with it, with your shirt off. Just to remind everybody. And your dog's out. And while they're over there a half mile away with the binoculars, just enough to hopefully have them go, , maybe let's pick the next guy. what I mean? And that night, I slept there and went to bed. And I woke up at 4 AM to this sound. And of course, I already had it in my mind, in case they come down to break it. It wasn't them. Unbeknownst to me, it pulled up six feet away from a train rail. And a train came by at 4 in the frickin' morning. And . And I was six feet from it. And that's what I woke up from, in that spot. you do feel at home. We just need a train going by. Train would be on the backside. , on the backside. In deserts, you got me in the desert. This is where I feel most at home in deserts. I don't know what it is. Deserts are cats. They're feline. , everything's incredibly clean. There's no mildew. There's no, the moisture's not there. If something rots, it dries. It doesn't. There's no bacteria. And I just love the cleanliness of a desert. I get a lot of energy in the desert. What's the difference between a nice guy and a good man? . , about that and there. But a nice guy has, is about something. A nice guy gets along. , I'll do that. , I'll do that. They don't necessarily have discernment or judgment. Not sure what they stand for or stand against. It's , yes, yes, yes, sure. , hey. A good man. A good man has ideals that they stand for and they'll stand against. And when they're tested, a good man is not a nice guy. That's in the chapter of Manning Up. , that's, I was at time when I was doing the rom-coms, that's all I could do. I was feeling my work was just me as a nice guy. And in life, I was not just a nice guy. I said, Camilla was pregnant. I got a child coming. I was, I was feral with masculinity. And. . And my work, maybe I was feeling a bit neutered. And I was , , I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm a good guy and a good man in life, but I'm just a nice guy at work. Can I be roles that can be a good man? And that was dramas. Cause in dramas you can stand for, stand against something. Your ceiling for pleasure and your basement for fame are up to you. How do you feel about it? And no direction can go, that's too much. That's not enough. You got too angry there. Oh, you meant that too much. Those that didn't come in a drama. Those come in a rom-com, ? Cause the emotions and how you feel are compressed to be in a buoyant level and a threshold that's up bouncing from cloud to cloud only. Dramas are as much pain, as much evil as you want to go as deep dark. You want to go get there. Let's see how far you go. How high you want to fly. How close to that sun you get for you before you get burned. Go see how far you go. That's what you get in drama. , thing I want for us to do is, talk about recent events. six, making your sell the plan on your done land. Eight Trying in the future world. Nine Hunting foricias CRHow can I play Mario Kart Aid and get in the beef. A cattle 9,ensed trn dulbycation 114 And in sports Dado virgo D fisher Aerts 10 Hinterland 30 because that is not for me. If you do trespass into my space, upon me and my family, there will be, I will do my best to cause consequences. And I'm gonna let that. I hope that's apparent because I'm not gonna intrude on you, but if you trespass that, I mean, I'm gonna stand up for it. And that we can talk our way out of that, great. No, it doesn't always work that way. , a good man's not looking for trouble, ? But if it comes and if he or something he cares about and loves were susceptible, being trespassed on by trouble, a good man does what he can to do to stop that. Aaron Bugsy tells this story. He famously had his house, a robbery attempt to code on the house and it's very nice house in Manchester. Manchester's got some spicy individuals in it from the gang culture. And there is a CCTV video of him. Now by this point, this is I think 21 or 22. he's been in the first movie. He has had multiple huge albums, world tour, rapping, done all the things, but most played fire in the booth, freestyle in history, all of this stuff, ? you might think even though he came from below the streets sort of he came from the sewers as a kid he has a public image to keep up maybe he's got soft the sort of velvet prison silk pajamas problem and he told me this story and his girlfriend rings she's in the house these men are trying to break in there's a barricade he's driving back with his sister in the car he's driving back and there's a guy by the side of the road and he can see he's got a brick in his hand Aaron stops the car opens the door and immediately says mate is that you blue shirt that's such a nice blue shirt and he's moving toward him he puts his hands in the air this he's moving toward him he's moving toward his move hits this guy brick drops finishes him off gets back in the car and this bit's captured on cctv and somebody overlaid it with the call to the police there's a 999 call going on from i think his girlfriend and she's driving back and he's driving back and he's driving back and he's driving back and she's driving back and he's driving back and he's driving back and he's driving back and he's going back and he's over again and he's driving back and after a 20-habitude bimbo this man a guy turns up in aicles and he's probably wondering are you a man that tupperjger why are you driving here that's originally we tried to answer that and as told us bismalem was driving france in the morning one plan for fens and money Abbott the cracker and the other three guy completely without stint at night he was driving fast but thenstarted she can't be any systemic rooms especially without a pickup truck thences when he's experiencing some rupee hutging at work he t bzw took few monies he was driving back and saw that bohamer with a himself in a got this he's already dealt with one of them he might have dealt with another one of them as and he pulls in this fancy mercedes you see this guy who's got kind of world at his feet opens the door to his mercedes pulls his shirt off and just sprints at this van and he it was fucking electric bro he told me this story is electric and that's on cctv that's great there's best video he ever made there huh hardcore it's hardcore but that's good man not a nice guy we'll get back to talking in one minute but first momentous make the highest quality supplements on the planet and i have fallen in love with their whey protein powder it is grass-fed and each batch is exclusively sourced from eu dairy farmers whose cows are free of hormones steroids and all of the other junk if you have been struggling to hit your protein goals which let's face it you're not going to be able to hit your protein goals is everybody momentous grass-fed whey is a super convenient way to get super convenient way to get extra protein into your diet lean muscle mass muscle growth supports recovery post exercise etc but it's also nsf certified for sport meaning that even olympians can use it and there is a 30 day money back guarantee you can buy either or both of these try them and if you don't it for any reason you will get your money back plus they ship internationally now you can get 35 percent off your first subscription and that 30 day money back guarantee is a 30 day money back guarantee you can buy either or both of these try them back guarantee by going to the link in the description below or heading to live momentous.com slash modern wisdom and using the code modern wisdom at checkout that's l-i-v-e-m-o-m-e-n-t-o-u-s.com slash modern wisdom and modern wisdom at checkout i guess are there any principles or have you learned when it comes to the masculinity thing are there any principles that you refuse to compromise on let's define let's let's have fun trying to define masculinity here i think we've rightfully come out of the chasm that macho is masculinity i think through certain perceived and not perceived and realistic overcompensations of say a me too movement that then some men felt shamed to be masculine good men not that way i know for a fact and again i want to say to all the women out there this has nothing to do with being exclusive of the rise of the and power of women but in that overcompensation of the women that's not the way to go overcompensation of the women that's not the way to go overcompensation of the women that's not the way to go overcompensation europe a lot of the culturally overcompensation except for the women that aren't gently and by crete be too the way to go in the overcompensation, especially when they said, come one, come all. And Aziz Azari got thrown up there with Harvey Weinstein. It's the same crime. You're going, no, that's not the same. Hang on a minute. Not the same. There are a lot of men trying to understand what that is. And anybody, they're not going to go down. , anything to be corrected, everyone overcompensates. what I mean? But there's men looking for a redefinition of what masculinity is. And there is a difference. There are some wonderful, beautiful differences between men and women, thankfully, biologically. Not always exclusive of each other, . But there's nothing that I see is up there at the top. What's one of the best thing for women all over the world is more good men. And a masculine, truly masculine man is not an oppressor. Truly masculine man is not macho. It's not chauvinist. But he's damn sure masculine. Most masculine I've ever felt. That's the birth of my first child. Never were my head, heart, and lungs. Never were my heart and lungs. Never were my head, heart, and lungs. Never were my head, heart, and lungs. And such synchronicity and the power that I had was, I mean, was probably the best husband ever at that time, too. Men want to be, and I don't know if this is biological, because I'm not saying women don't, but men want to and are looking for ways to be relied upon. And we say, , but you always want to be the savior and you always want the solution. . Cool. Is there nothing wrong with wanting to find the solution to things? Great. Let's work with that. Thank you, women, for saying, glad you got the solution, but just listen to me for a second, Lauren, because I'm not looking for a solution. Actually, I just want to talk this out, and I'll probably answer my own question. what I mean? Doesn't mean don't be the male side of you that wants to find the solution or wants to be relied upon. It's being redefined now. And there's a lot of, I talked to them, and a lot of young men and middle-aged men that are looking. , part of this role I got to play in this last film, The Lost Bus, it was not visible to me that I was also representing a large group of men who were middle-aged, who woke up and looked around and were , oh, shit. This isn't where I thought I'd be. Oh, shit. I haven't. I haven't built anything. Failed marriages. Failed jobs. Some of them did it all , too. A lot of them, when things got tough, they snuck out the back door. Got the divorce. Didn't go one step further. Didn't show up. And that caught up with them. But that's also a large group of the demographic of men going , what does masculinity mean? How and where can I be relied upon? That gives me dignity to be relied upon. That gives me significance. Call it what you want, but if you think that's true, and I do, there's nothing wrong with that. what is masculinity? ? And I'm not going to, , let's get past the, what are some of your definitions of understandings of what masculinity is? If we were going to say men, here's something that you should expect of yourself and pursue as a biological male. ? It seems a lot of the definitions converge on similar sorts of traits. Emotional composure tends to be one of them. Competence tends to be another. The ability to be decisive. . Is another of those. . we're starting to build this. We're starting to build this sort of suite of traits that it is. But as soon as you start to try and alter the edge cases, , , I mean, , you're going to have somebody who's got emotional control. , that even slightly at its extreme is a denial of emotions and no vulnerability. . Sort of all the bad bits of stoicism with none of the good bits. . And then, . . You want a sort of competence. , that very quickly sort of turns into a single-minded progress at all costs, regardless of what anybody else thinks. And decisiveness turns into being domineering. And certain. Yes. . . . I don't need to listen. I don't need to listen to you. I think it is a very delicate balance. And I think it's a good point to say. Me too. Me too was an important rebalance to men being able to use their positions of power to get access to women in ways that they shouldn't have done. -. And the goal of me too was to sanitize the toxic elements of men's behavior. But instead, it just sterilized all of them. It sterilized all of the elements of its behavior. I think it. And I think it's when it became many movements are on when it's a rifle. But as soon as they become general admission. . . It becomes the shotgun spread and it's , , we gotta, , come on. . I don't know. You telling the truth. Oh, it doesn't matter. . Come on. It stops. That's it. It stops being the opportunity to, , rebalance something and it starts being an opportunity to grind an ax and continue to sort of put your foot on the neck of, of somebody else. . I think, , , you end up with this, this strange situation, especially around me too. This is a pattern. I mentioned to you last time about, , type a people with type B problems and type B people with type B problems. . . . . . . . When we, , have, we've got three type A people and some type A people have typeia problem, they're gonna be people with type A problems. And the theme of that is advice that's given on mass is, , sometimes , even for the majority, but we'll be, , absorbed asymmetrically. If you give everybody the same supplements, some people will be hyperresponders and people will not respond at all. . And sometimes the hyperresponders are the people who didn't need it already. Whoo. . an example, when it comes to the me too thing. . who really needed to heed don't be pushy are precisely the men that message will not work on and the men who are most likely to take it to heart are the ones who probably needed a little bit more encouragement to go up to that girl in the bar if you're the type of guy who's a little bit more in serial and a little bit more concerned and you didn't want to make her feel uncomfortable and you had approach anxiety and then believe all women do not are you the toxic male gaze you do not need to do the thing you're gonna think oh I knew I knew all along that was the case I must not I must not do this thing whereas if you're the sort of guy who was already being way too pushy unfortunately this advice is there are hyper responders and those that aren't and unfortunately a lot of the time to people that are most likely to respond to bits of advice and this is the same thing when it comes to men should be vulnerable men should show their emotions more out of the panoply the full spectrum of men who do you think is most likely to take on board the message men should be more vulnerable men who are already vulnerable they've got a disposition to be more vulnerable the guys that have got the denial of emotions boom a absent father fucking generational trauma passed down thing they're not taking that on board and it's just is a natural thing to believe man too but only in the best of times for sure I think it's a fascinating challenge that we face when you say the people who most need to hear a message are often the ones that are least likely to hear it. And when you scattergun it across everyone, you can actually not reduce down the bad incidents you're trying to get rid of and further reduce down the good that you were hoping to hold onto. It's a solvent that works in reverse and it strips away the stuff that you were trying to keep and doesn't get rid of the bad stuff you wanted to evacuate. what can we all learn? What can men learn and what can women learn? . What can we learn from that heavy me to air where it was a toxic access that was, you were getting away with it. And all of a sudden, -. And I agree. But not to emasculate the good men or not have the ones that maybe were not offenders, but boy, . , a little bit more macho to have them not puff the chest out more and go, , I'm going to double down on the macho to push that back. Cause I, I'm probably see it as a little more progressive of a, of a, of a time in the way that I agree. The ones that maybe were worse than the good men. And I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. Trying to recede. We're now going, holy shit. I was . But I also do think that it did chop down the top of the tree and reminded a lot that as you go, you better back off, better back down, boy. A hundred percent. . A hundred percent. That's not me saying it's all bad, obviously. , but it's, , thinking about the asymmetry of absorption, , when it comes to stuff that. , , I think one of the things that I would, hope we've learned from that situation is, , the idea of Chesterton's fence. . , , GK Chesterton talks about, , a liberal and a conservative come across a fence post to two fence posts in the field here, in front of us. Is there a fence here? And I don't have a fence, but you can imagine there's a fence. . . Two fence posts with a little bit of why between them and the liberal would say, I see no reason for this fence. We should break it down. Conservative would say, Hey, hold on a second. Someone put that there. Maybe it is there for a reason. And the tension between, , innovation, novelty, adventurousness, openness, and, , respect for tradition, stasis, status quo, , on the other side, this is the, perennial push and pull. How much should we throw out these old traditions and how much should we? And I think we learned a lesson to maybe temper the throttle a little bit to just sort of feather it as opposed to, , whitewashing. And I, you made a great point, which is women want eligible, men want eligible women. And I think that's a really good point. I think that's a really good point. I think that's a really good point. I think that's a really good point. I think that's a really good point. And this is why a zero sum view of empathy, , that if you give a degree of empathy toward the plights of men, despite the fact that for most of human history, they had some benefits that women didn't apart from the war and the death and the homelessness and the drug addiction and the, , on and forth. , if you say we can't give empathy to these people because it'll take away empathy, which is not how empathy works. No, it's not exclusive. No, it's not exclusive. It's not zero sum. It's not a limited resource that we have. , if you'd say, , boohoo, poor patriarchy, sad complaining in the same breath, , men do not deserve sympathy. They've had it good for long. We don't need to raise them up. And in the next sentence saying, where are all of the good men? , I think the only way we can do that is mating logic seppuku, ? , and , I just, I get the sense if any group has an issue, almost any group in society, we spend billions of money in taxpayer funded dollars to set up surveys and initiatives. We don't tell them to pull themselves up by their bootstraps. If men have a problem, it is treated in a very, very unique way. Anybody else on the planet has a problem. We say, what can we do to help them? And if they don't, we don't have a solution. We say, what can we do to fix society? But if men have a problem, we say, what is it men are doing where they don't fix themselves? And this is just a price that we need to pay as guys. It's a price we need to pay. I've kind of given up on fighting against it, but I certainly think after the last few years, maybe we can just settle here. . We've exorcised that demon. Let's fucking start anew. . . I'm with, , I, I, one of the things I was questioning a lot of my friends of mine and some, many of them, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know. But one of the females that were around the leadership from the Me Too movement was, when are you going to start inviting the good men, , to these gatherings? , come on. That's, it's not, you're not, it's not a, at the end, it's not a battle of the sexes. It's a behavior that you're getting saying, hey, no more of that, that the male was doing. Great. Now that's understood, there's a lot of men that agree. I remember, , it was , a lot of people in my industry, men and women were , would tweet out when it first happened. After the wine scene stuff, , I just want to go on record and let I don't believe in writing either. And I was , what are you doing, dude? You're kind of setting it up , was that questionable before? And then it was, if you didn't write that or something that, it was , what about you? The black square of me too. I was never. , the black square of me too. , , . I was never, I wasn't on the fence about it before, ? And that, , that was not, it was more than different than just funny, but I remember that being an odd reaction. . , , I hope the dust settles. And I believe it is settling now. Because I know that a lot of people, women included, that are friends of mine, that probably, , were a large part of the Me Too movement, would, I think, in some part, agree with what we're saying, going, we don't want to, we're not talking about cancelling men. what I mean? That's not, that was cancelling masculinity. And that would be not a good thing to do for men or women. Correct. It's creating the exact dearth of eligible male partners that they say that they're looking for. . You've got this great line where you say, many people are obsessed with how to live longer instead of how to live better. . How do you come to think about that? . . . Quantity. Success without the profit. Ooh, how much more can I get? It's, I'm for it, the longevity. I'm for it. But in the pursuit of it, are we measuring quality of life along the way? Some people aren't. And I personally don't want to have the highest number, but then go, , I need fun. Or I didn't enjoy that. Or I didn't, that sucked. I'm just trying to remind everyone that just in business, when I say success without the profit, we have plenty of people that succeed. If you've got the most money, the most toys, you succeed. And we talked about those people earlier that have the end of the day, have problems with relationships or they can't sleep or they can't get the dick up, whatever. They didn't profit. They're not profiting with their success. Profit measures quality with the quantity. I'm saying, real success is when you have profit. , really great longevity would be for those quality years, quality time left in this life. I also say that because while I'm not looking forward to it, I'm not really afraid of death or dying. I'm not looking forward to it. I'm not shaking my boots if I'm face to face with that great white. what I mean? I'm not looking forward to it, but I see it as a, obviously it's inevitable. And obviously I personally see it as a, hopefully a comma, , not a period. the number, the higher number, I don't know. Just to, I do. Y'all just watch being obsessed with that at the expense of quality of life. Is it the trade off or do the two work in tandem? Is what the trade off. Obsessed with how to live longer than how to live better. Do you think it detracts? No, I don't think it, I don't think it necessarily detracts, but it can. I do think inevitably you might be, if you're obsessed with the projection length that you're going to miss a couple of really, really worthwhile parties now where you may learn something, have the great love of life, take a certain risk that, Oh, you may not make it out of that, but we're going to do it anyway. And I'm all for projection. It's a lot of what might get my, it's a lot of my jam. How far can we project in the future? Boy, the further we can project, project the further I think we can see in the past, the more we have the ability to invest in ourselves today to get that more ROI tomorrow. I just think an obsession with the number can sometimes get in the way of seeing more of an obsession with the quality and the meaning of what we're doing here. What's now and tomorrow. Is that something you, do to remind yourself to inject more fun into your life? Oh, I mean, I've got some simple tricks, , if I'm not sure how to respond, try to make the default to motion humor. And I'm a big fan, a big fan of, of, of humor. And I wish we had more of it. , and I think it's how we're going to get through a lot of these things that we have, , is we're going to have to all giggle at a few things and go, . And also at ourselves, to be able to, I'm still learning and getting better at to giggle at myself when I bogey, what I mean? Just go, . And, and, and to not be afraid of that failure and be able to fess up and go, , that was me. Oh, geez, that didn't work. , laughter. I think we, it's taken as being dis compassionate sometimes, or it's being insensitive and flippant. . you're making, , you're making the crisis benign. You're not giving the crisis credit. No, I'm giving the crisis credit, but I'm saying the crisis has happened. And now we got to deal with getting through this son of a bitch. it's going to be tough. let, can we giggle our way through untying this knot? I'm not patronizing the crisis at all. I just want to go out and have a, , it's why, , , , , the greatest comedians, , Chappelle, he says stuff while the wounds to people go, you can't say that. Now the wounds too fresh. It's why he's smart and why he's funny. Cause he says it beforehand and calls it out. Jimmy car's got a bit about that, where I think he says, , saying that there is a topic too sensitive to joke about is saying there is a disease too serious to treat. . . I that. Wow. . ? . What, , , and humor as with is, is, is a learning and a teaching tool and, and, and, and, and a, and a true humility with our own selves, what we can learn and how we can learn what we know and written what we don't know. , and it's, , it's, it's a great way to not convert. It's a great way to help someone understand it makes it. It's why I'm rhyming in here. It's why some of these are ditties. I'm saying let's sell Sunday morning, a Saturday night. Let's let's, let's, let's have a beer on the way to the temple. And I mean, let it, it's, it's more digestible. We can dance to it. And the broccoli actually does more than taste candy. It is the candy. Ha. What's that? , you got a poem called life and candy crush. Is there a parallel between the two? I love that game. I love candy crush guys. I said it. . You're out there. You send me some free lives or certain. A whole bunch of those prizes in there. . I, I, my kids always bless me for playing candy. Cause I'm , this is a great game. And let me tell you why. I decided to put in there what I've shared with my children, what I've noticed, but you've learned from the great game. I learned from the great game of candy crush. . That's funny. , I'm interested in where confidence comes from as far as you're concerned. . , it definitely comes from. Belief. Not hope. It comes from pulling something off. It comes from. Oh, I, I think I got an ability to do that. Let me work on that. Let me prepare to do that. Oh shit. I'm not sure. Bam. I'm in the game. Action, cut life or movie. , I did it. I felt it too. I know I did it. And you who were the observer go, you did it. I got confidence. I personally felt it and it translated subjectively. I felt it. And objectively you went, . Confidence. I make a big plan. I write something out a plan for the day, the week and an event, a circumstance, a scene, or write out all this stuff, what my incentives are, what I want to do, what I hope comes from this. And I shut that. And a year later, I'm , I'm going to do this. I'm going to do this. I'm going to do that. And a year later I do that scene or I'm at that event. And someone comes up afterwards. He goes, what that was, man, that was bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop, bop. I can feel this coming out and I can feel Bruce get down on his knees. He says, I can feel this coming out. He never crushes me up. And I have to do this with him. I have to do this with him. It's, it can go the way the King. the reason behind that instinct and how to, how to, where's the time timing. Oh, it'll work. I think here. Who's the audience I'm talking to. Oh . I'm going to make a plan for that cell. If it's all sales for that transaction or whatever it is. And bam, it hits and it lands. I wanted it to dogs. Damn it. Was that deja vu? It happened. That's how I saw it. That I get confidence from that. , , I've still working on and, and, and, , now I think even more in this, I'm not going to say second half, whatever the fifties humility while still maintaining confidence. I had a really tough relationship with humility, the definition until I heard, , I think, I think it was Jordan Peterson's definition. Humility is admitting we have more to learn. And I was , oh, whoa, I'm in, I can get on board with that. Let me sign up because before that humility to be humbled, to be humiliated, my shoulders would sink. I would be small, passive and wouldn't speak up or there's the opportunity. I was, I, I, and I miss it. And I was , man, I don't think that's what it means, but I don't know how to get around it. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . We need the definition of words to change a little bit that. And that could be just, that can be at one 80. what I heard the other day, I heard a fantastic new definition of vulnerability. What was it? Said vulnerability. Is saying your truth in spite of the consequences, especially when they're scary. Oh, see, that sounds fun. Can I board with that? That sounds fun. That's a, that, that's a different kind of surrender. You say what's true. in spite of the consequences. In spite of the consequences. Especially when it's scary. I'll be damned. Especially when it's scary? . Especially when it's scary. . I that. It's got offense to it. , , . I feel I'm on the front foot. . I feel it's something that's noble. . All . And it's the same with this rework or perhaps the original work of humility. . I get something to learn. It takes courage. I can step forward into this. Yes. I'm not stepping back away from it. And I think specifically with men, I think. It's perhaps a very smart way to do a super secret squirrel technique. . , Jedi mind trick to go. this is not a step back. It's actually a lexically Brazilian jiu-jitsu Yes. This thing into. You're going forward now. But , I think. And dare I say, women out there, did you hear that? Manipulate us to feel that way. Oh, . Go for it. Happily. Play with us. I will be manipulated all day into that. And call us childish for wanting and needing that. Play it, man. We'll take it. These are the cheat codes. . Let us lay them out in front of you. . , one of the best bits of advice that I heard, this sort of reframe that's similar to that. This guy was talking about he was in a relationship with a lady and he had to be clean-shaven through the week and would leave his facial hair to grow over the weekend. By Sunday evening, , he's got enough stubble to really scratch. And his ex-partner would say, I just hate on a Sunday where your face is scratching me in my mouth. I'm red and raw and it's annoying. And needless to say, that relationship didn't work. And then he moved into another relationship. And this new partner had the exact same preference but said to him, honey, I find it sexy when you're clean-shaven. I think that's just the hottest thing in the world. Incentives, incentives. Yes. Follow the incentives. Oh, just lay out. That little breadcrumb in front of us. We will chase that carrot, man. We're lead pipe cinched. It's easy. , , , , . Without complacency, trust that time is on your side. What do you mean, though? , man. I'm going to get a header behind it. And then I can get in a rush. And I haven't found, look, and I know how to hustle. And let's go. The clock's ticking. We're all behind. All hands on deck. We got to bust ass. No time for pause. There's no sleep, no nothing. Get the caffeine out. Let's go. -. Sometimes we got to do that. But that is usually because an unforeseen circumstance has happened, that there's a crisis we got to deal with, or we've procrastinated and I put myself in that position. We got to cram. -. But it's not those two circumstances. We got to watch ourself getting ahead of time. And it's on your side. It's a little what I mean about the living longer and living more quality. Time's on our side. And we're forced to think and feel, especially today with how fast things move, that more productivity, faster pace, more information, faster pace. That's better. We're ahead of time a lot. But time's still moving at the same speed. And they're not given more than 24 hours a day, even though me, a lot of people are looking for more. -. There's not any more unless you just want to change your workday. And some people do. Me, I need my nine and a half hours sleep. If I want to say I'm getting four hours sleep, I'm going to get five and a half more hours of workday, to be more productive. I would, but not to making that trade off. -. It's on our side. And when we're feeling we're dancing with time, I know I'm usually getting as much, or I'm getting more done at the same pace. -. Than if I'm, it's the John Wooden, a great basketball coach for UCLA. Be quick, but don't be in a hurry. That was his note to the, his basketball players. It's , be quick, but don't be in a hurry. You will miss things. , it's, it's, it's, it's, it's the Lego set, man. And you sit there and you get in a rush. You don't read the directions. You get to the end and you've got 12 pieces left. And you're , shit. Because you got in a hurry. You got ahead of time. Instead of just that feeling of, I've checked out what I need to do. And it's all adding up and this thing's built in the foundation, ? And boom, there's the last piece. It fits. Voila. It was with time. Time's on our side. It's not an enemy. The end. Death is not the enemy. I do believe that part of, , not in a rush to get there and we can stave it. We want to stave it off sometimes. And that it can be a screaming fight and partially denial can help us get there. I understand that, but still it's on our side. It's going to happen. And since it's going to happen and there's that's non-negotiable, might as go, , I'm not going to rush to try and make more of it than there is. I want to try and spend the time I got. I want to try and do as I can produce, succeed, achieve, whatever those things are, but also at a pace that I'm me, that I to dance to. I the giving the take. I the reverb. I the cause and effect of how things are happening at this pace. How are we orienting ourselves now since time is speeding up much faster with AI? I don't ask you this with AI. And I mean, this is an objective question. With AI, with all these podcasts, with all these wealth of information that people can get at all times, and no one's listening to music anymore. They listen to everybody talk about this and reading up on this and they're finding out the answers in 10 seconds. That would have taken them 10 days to get before. Do people sound smarter to you? No. Me neither. They don't sound dumber. I do think. we were talking about significance. I do think. I'm talking about if everything's significant, nothing significant at all. I do think that I talk to people that feel they're hyperly punched in their information. Absolutely fucking great. Just splashing out. But I'm going, walk dude. What was the theme there? Did you have a bass guitar in your band? You need a bass guitar or at least somebody on percussion. Hold it down. Cause I didn't hear the theme. I didn't hear the thread. It was digits. Where was the soul in that story? Which goes back to the quality with the quantity, the quantity of information, how can we have the soul in it? Where, , I hear the rhyme. , there's rhyme to that. Those digits. There's rhyme to those facts. Oh, I see how they add up. Oh, but what if you put them in this order? Ha, they add up to another thing. Or actually they may add up to the same damn thing. Interesting. Now I've got a rhyme. Now there's a song. That happens when time's on your side and you're looking at it. And I still offer, I open that up without complacency. start now. That doesn't mean time's on my side. , dude. Inch'Allah. When it happens, it'll happen. No. I'm , wake up. Clock's ticking. It's on your side. Now just move with it. Dance with it. Put some soul with the facts. Matthew McConaughey, ladies and gentlemen. Dude, you're great. You're fantastic. Super fun talking to you. Do it for hours. Did we just do that for an hour or ? Two and a bit. Did we really? , again, it flies. It flies when you're having fun. New book. . Points of prayers. That's it. Some belief. Not just belief in God, but I think it's in short supply and I think more of us need it. And if we don't have more of it, doubt's going to win. If doubt wins, we're all going to lose. And we've got stuff out there to believe in. I think people are looking for it. I know I am. And I think it's something we need. I know it's something I need. And then I'm enjoying talking about it. I'm kind of saying this is sort of therapeutic. Spiritual therapy for me. I'm not saying it's not. It's something for me because I'm getting to talk about it. I'm getting to talk with smart people about it. I'm getting questioned about it. I'm getting to repeat some of it's becoming a mantra for me. And then I'm going to go put a lot of this to music. I hit the road. I've got some great musicians coming out to join me on stage and they're playing scores behind some of my reads. It's going to be fun. Unreal. . A thousand episodes. Thank you for joining me. It's a really special one. You're welcome. My pleasure. you're an Airstream connoisseur. . . the originals, this is the first time that I know of that they partnered. I think it was somebody based out of San Francisco and they said, hey, let's modernize it up just a hair. these were new. This was a new design. Just a little cleaner. This is the one original one I had. I called it the canoe. And that's the one that I mainly been on the road with for about three years. Wow. . I think it was early 2000. . It was me and my dog just traveling around. And if you and I are meeting a director or someone to work with, to meet, I'd be , , next Tuesday, let me see, man. I'm going to Albuquerque. I'm kind of moving this direction. I tell you what, flying to Albuquerque airport, I'll pick you up at nine in the morning. And then how about if I'm driving that direction, I'll drop you off in Lincoln, Nebraska. How about, , six o'clock that night, you get this six o'clock out of Lincoln. We'd have our meeting on the road while I was pulling the Airstream. . And every one of those meetings was a great meeting. I bet it was. It was , . And it was some people stayed the night and that's all my meetings. That's when we had a Blackberry and I don't know the phones you have now, but I was all over North America and this, and I took this out, built my own table in Louisiana with the carpenter. I got given a paddle reasons called a canoe. I had this, I stayed with the Indian Squamish nation, Indian reservation in Vancouver. Worked on a film too for the money. And on that reservation, there was a paparazzi that had moved in. And he was , , hiding behind trees in the trailer park. And it's the Squamish nation in your reservation is their private property. The chief's name, no shit was Mike Hunt. Chief Mike Hunt went and his brothers went to this guy and said, you are not welcome here. He's , it's a free contract. You can stay away from me. He goes, no, no, no. If you're disturbing someone in our tribe or making them any way uncomfortable, you're out. They kicked him out. The guy got the boot for just taking pictures and I would, they would, I had ribeyes, ? And they would catch their co salmon in shopping carts down the river, set up the rocks where it was fun with the salmon into the shopping cart. They come up with a fresh salmon and I would trade them cooked ribeyes for their salmon. It was our barter. And he gave me the paddle when I left. And he said, in our nation, as we travel the rivers, the oar is the, the river. And I said, , , I'm not going to be able to get a free cart. That's my only attention. What I'm able to get back is the compass, the rudder for our tannu. And as you travel the rivers, highway rivers of North America, may this keep you in your heart. . That's sick. , you might not have noticed, but there's balloons because this is episode 1000 today. Oh alright. You are episode 1000 on this show. Come on, alright? . Look at that. Let's get going. Let's get started. Love it. It's getting going. Wow. I'm in a scene? What? Who's he talking to? I don't know. I'm in a scene with Kevin. Thank you very much for tuning in. Usually I have something to sell you, typically another episode at the end of episodes. But that is 1,000 episodes of Modern Wisdom, the end of the first millennium. And getting to do it again with Matthew here on this video wall thing is really cool and beautiful. And it's very meaningful to me. And doing 1,000 episodes of anything, doing 1,000 of anything at all is a pretty big ask. If it wasn't for the fact that they were all numbered and I'd recorded them, I would have imagined that it was closer to 300 or 400. I've just compressed down time over the last seven and a half years. But I want to say thank you very much for following me, for supporting the show. Obviously, this has been a labor of love. as much as I whine and complain about how tired I am, I wouldn't change it for anything else. I don't want to do anything that would make me feel I'm a little bit more at 2.23 p.m. on a Thursday in the middle of Texas than sit down and have this conversation. thank you for joining me. And here's to another 1,000. All . See you next time.