I forgot that I should watch the E1. I didn't hear your introduction either. It could have been anything. I said everything. You didn't hear anything of it. I said . Actually, I have to correct you again. Actually there was a man in a hat. Yes, not here. That's rather stinking. In Cologne. And that's why no hat today. Because the lady in the mask made me nice the bald head. That was such an elaborate thing. A colleague was brought in there. You don't pull anything over it. Or are you in there with such a lollipop and then it spontaneously made you bald. We often didn't even know what was under the hat. Often there was nothing under it either. And now . And here, as I said, hat left because I think the whole studio is. I don't want to say overfilled, but I think that's just the amount of vases on the table. Everything else would have been too little. If you can't put 82 vases on it. For me exactly the amount. I do something wrong at home. The intendant today personally . That's unbelievable. This is my WDR. That's really . You had to take plants several times. Just that all the vases are full. Yes, that's the WDR TV garden. That's our alternative. Unbelievable. the Auenland. My bucket with wine gum. I'm happy. But that's our approach to warm up the hearts of the guests. And I see that with you . You definitely have a sense for the beautiful and the floral. Come on, Thorsten. That's why I can't say anything. I don't want to say anything. No, no, that's that. that's what I was talking about. In fact, it's a brave, a good decision. A brave decision. Yes, brave as . But let's not talk about vases. I think, I just noticed that because someone sat down and someone in the decor says vase, vase, vase, vase. There was a communication error and anyone who ever worked had a vase. That's an incredible amount. Vases. That's the way it is. There was also a showman who said he collects cups or something. And then somehow 8 million people sent him cups. For God's sake, I don't want any more cups. And that's how it started here in the show with the vase. But that's actually quite nice. And that with the wine gum is also . You can't confuse it. Not that you eat the flowers here in the end and the wine gum stays there. There you have to . Before my show with Bettina Böttinger, it was in exactly the same angle, this crocodile. That's why I won't go there. I don't think it's going to be cleared away. Because it's stoned by now. A fossil crocodile in a glass. , in this . good, now we have already met a part of you. The largest part. My fable for vases is far away. I have to . I follow your work very interested and have heard that you do online tai chi, but in the garden primarily. I do online tai chi often. I don't even take part. I do it for myself. I turn off the front camera. Then these people who give courses are just busy. And yes, I would to do that because it doesn't sound work. But yes, I've missed it more often. There are also such conversations. Conversations? Yes, and then I just don't go there because I have another Zoom call. in theory I do online tai chi. You can book that via a portal whose name you don't want to be mentioned. You can book everything, actually. Except paragliding or something that. That's hard to realize. Why not? Dead. But I always found tai chi interesting and great because I always thought that when I'm in New York, I'll just crawl into the park and just stand there. That's , they stand there. They make such charismatic movements. Kung fu. Chinese. Chinese. It's more Chinese. Is that also suitable for that? It's also important for me that you can also furnish people or do you just do it the smooth way? You can . People have to stay still for a very long time if they want to be furnished. Because the relationship between animals is very important. Because you feed yourself relatively slowly and many movements are seen for the antagonist. Difficult. It's a plane where you feed yourself very slowly, but you can clap. In between, you're not angry at me, ? You can call in that. No, that's just supposed to be movement processes and the chi, the kikiri chi support. And I found it interesting as a course. I had such a voucher and . I think Ben is just about to join us. I think too. You can't even get in with the shoes. I almost thought that. I almost thought that. No, because it's . We can talk openly. you had your birthday a week ago. Why do you say talk openly? That sounds I would have killed a dog. Let's talk openly again, Thorsten. It is the . No, I discovered the inner Jürgen Fliege for me. No, because I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. I have a dog. It's the last one, with a five at the front. It's of course a phase of life that a man enters. , you mean . Next year . I can tell, you're starting to swim. You see, I have the one there. Next year I'll be sixty, but only if everything goes . That's important. I've been asked today by a whole investigation of AWATS, which probably really have cartilage bones. I'm afraid of turning sixty. And my fear is really not to be sixty. That's mostly what. . Otherwise I don't expect much from myself in the area of muscle building and ice skating. I just want to be that. I hope I count on a good cake and that's it. Then I'm 60. But are there any certain self-optimization tendencies in this phase of life that you have the feeling that . Yes, showering. And that's . . Now always . No. Hey, wait a minute. Last week we had the big Franz Müntefering there, who said, I'll go take a cold shower. He showers only cold, ? Only cold. He's been at 90 seconds again in many, many years. He always counts to 100. Actually it was always up to 100. And you could see how he was doing. And in the last broadcast he was only up to 70. Now he's back at 90. Did he tell him to wash out shampoo at higher temperatures? Because I understand cold showers. And maybe it was also with the Marines or something. It's no use except that you save maybe 9 euros over the year. I think cold showers are such an unnecessary self-intention. But now we have Thorsten, the other Thorsten in the round. The other Thorsten has already spoken in a mask. Excuse me, then we won't talk anymore. I want to swim with whales and then jump into a parachute. That would be a normal sport for the weekend. But I'm just disappointed by cold showers myself. I have that for preparation of my Norseman. Exactly. Triathlon in Norway, which I have now established. Norseman Norwegian. And I prepared myself for the cold and the cold weather. And I prepared myself for the cold and the cold weather. I started in the autumn and winter. To go to the Baltic Sea and swim in the Alps. I kept it for a few minutes. And cold showers were part of it. And I thought, now I'm really tough. And I'm also from the immune system. I'm stalled. I will never get to know the cold again. And now I was sick for a week. Congratulations. And that really made me very disappointed. We even have a photo of it. A little stupid. How you shower. But is the ice bucket really that important? The ice bucket brings to a certain degree . Look there, please. It's a bit Thorsten on the Rocks. a cocktail that you get delivered. If it was an ice cup, I wouldn't order it. But in itself it is . Does the ice bring more? Because I have now read about such cold chambers. Now once in Demolition Man. But also that you let yourself freeze for 30 seconds. And then you come out and sleep better. Or always. Or for ever. But there are cold chambers everywhere. And that should really bring something. Yes. But that should actually bring something too. What should bring something? The cold water. the . The climbing into the ice bath or into the Baltic Sea on January 1st. That should also bring something. How, how cold? And now someone brought something to me that I have overcome this cold shock in the fjord in Norway. But not this virus that I just had after that. I really thought that. No, you're disappointing. You don't do anything against viruses. But the virus may also come from the Alster. You don't know exactly. If it had been the Elbe, I would have said guaranteed. It was definitely the Elbe. But I mean . I notice that you don't have any tendencies for that kind of thing. That you now say, I want to run a marathon or something. Is now with you . Marathon? Yes, can be. Question of the route somewhere. But actually . If it is possible to reach it on foot, why not? , . Yes. I have, to mention it briefly, but read the book by Mr. Schröder. That means, he has every phase, but the last book. Yes. And it's about these sports, among other things. And about his career. And I have to say that reading about this sport is a bit exhausting. I have to say, I notice that I am not made for that. But only for natural movements. Whereby the natural movements come from what you have learned. You are a learned gentleman tailor. Yes. And did you think about it briefly? No, I asked myself what this is about the movements. , an automatism. You still know it. Yes, I still know it. You still tailor privately. I think you have a costume. I read that, I have tailored. And rubber soles play a role. Yes, that's . The term fetish is already in the air now, of course. No, not everything to do with rubber is fetish. Yes. In fact, I tinker with costumes and then I work with rubber. And you can't sew rubber badly. It has to stick more. Many have certainly already asked that. Of course. That's why I want to answer it now. I want to have the blank, incomprehensible face of a waiter in it. Finally. Because I say, rubber has to be glued. You can't just go with the needle. But back to the vases. In fact, it is . That's very funny. No, of course not. I don't care. This cutting remains as a craft. If you have learned such a craft, it will remain , strangely enough, which is probably not the case with BWL. Yes. And . Yes, that's . That's learned theoretical knowledge. But if you . I have more respect for a carpenter, I don't want to say, than for my tax advisor. I really respect myself. And . But you have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. I have to be careful. No, my tax advisor has to carry too many sums with him. Because a tax advisor is not reprehensible. Actually, no. Because my tax advisor . I mean, a tax advisor is ultimately a high- люth Google on fentanyl. Follows faster and is intimately . You have to . If you've done something wrong, you have to ask for such a tax advisor. Then you write in and always say, I wrote that. Because, yes. That's what it's about. It's about finding out who you are, who you are, how you are. It's also about how . If you've done something wrong, you have to ask an AI. Then you write in, I wrote this. Such a bad insult. And when the AI knows that it's from you, it says, thank you for sharing this opportunity openly. If you write from others, you're a dirty bitch. That's completely speculative and completely tendentious. You can't trust an AI either. I don't think tax advisors will be replaced. I think tax programs will be replaced. If you've done it ten times, the AI knows, the little cross has to go there, it's self-sufficient. If we were talking about this topic, would you have thought years or decades ago that you would have to spend longer than five minutes with your tax advisor? No, and I didn't do it either. There were many, many times about five minutes. Because I'm not good at submitting receipts. Often too late. And he says, submit your paperwork, mega. But punctuality is not necessarily your thing anyway. Everything has its time. That's what my grandma always said, without context. Everything has its time. And that's punctuality. It's never too late to be punctual. I'm actually not good at submitting receipts and things that. And I think I did more good to the Reklinghausen Finance Office than they could ever give it back, which they don't do either. And I have to be a little more disciplined. I have to ask myself how much electricity I have to pay. And I have to ask myself, how much electricity do I have to pay? How many electrical appliances can I use? I'm not good at that. I'm grateful to the tax advisor for tips. But calling is also such a weakness. And that's why I don't go to him often and don't even know it. And that's the way it is. I could optimize everything if I wanted to. But what the tax advisor tells me, I don't understand anything. Tax law is complex. I can only say, let's halve it. And I think, then it's still bearable. But it's not bad for a freelancer, if that you're putting half back, you're still much further than many others. I've heard that too. I've heard that too, actually. But that's how it is. Tax advisor is a super important job. You make yourself funny about it. But Uli Hoeneß also says that . I'll start the sentence differently. I trust my tax advisor. He's from Cologne, of course. And specializes in our media spagofils. And you're very grateful that you . I also ask him nonsense things. I call him and say, I bought a hat. I can put it on. Then I put it back on. You're a collector. You collect these figures a lot. You have to keep the inner child. The outer thing ferments me away. But the inner child . I collect a lot, but not that much. Because that's going to be weird. I've also stopped collecting excessive things. I've also collected cups. And glasses. And vases. As I said, someone has to look at you. What is the excessive? The hobby psychologist will say, there has to be a balance. There has to be a balance. If you collect a lot of cups, no idea, more drinking. But I collected a lot of cups until the cupboards were full. Now you have a lot of cups with funny lines on them, whose context has been lost. And then you collected comics, which is a pest for itself. Because everything you collect on paper has a Messi character. ? Oh, . Paper, nothing with paper. Gutenberg Bible, yes. Mickey Mouse, no. And then I collected . Now I'm actually only collecting autographs. I have to say. I'm an autograph collector. That's why I always have understanding for the strange people. Many say, you all know that. You get an autograph collector and think, hmmm. Dude. ? Everyone has their own rules, their own pen. And I collect too. I then upload the autographs. you don't get them personally and say, Mr. Pocher, could I have an autograph? No, I have one from Frank Sinatra uploaded. That would have been difficult to wait for that. You can also do that on platforms or one from Michael Keaton as Batman. With a certificate, that no one knows. Someone repainted it. I think that's great then. Would your mother have expected that you would be someone from whom other autographs are uploaded? I thought the sentence ended with, that you would be someone. You could have ended the sentence there. You could have done . No, I don't think . actually, my position in the family was fixed. It's fixed with everyone. Yes, that's true. You're a bit of a dummy. Funny, funny bird. Grandma Rita has a birthday, knock one out. And point. We'll clean it up again. I'm not your crazy one here. And I'm not a crazy one. I worked with my mother, which was a pleasure for her. It was really a mixture of part-time jobs, which still go for 14 hours. At the shipyard. You were the boss of a shipyard. My mother was the boss of a shipyard in Herne. How can I make it worse? My mother was the boss of a shipyard in Herne and I worked all day, until often late at night. That's how I started writing. I'm grateful. And I always wondered, would my mother have said, you've brought this and that, and here and there, and tra la, and tax advisor, and kikiriki, look, two identical shoes. Because they always poked you properly. Exactly. But I almost believe that my mother, you have to be honest with yourself, my mother was a cool woman in the context of her possibilities. Knüppelhardt. But maybe I would have said, now you've finally found something. Working two hours a day for pig money. Exactly your thing. That could have been exactly the same. ? Has she ever, this, this, unfortunately, not experienced anymore. Oh, the gigantic success. , come on, I bet you, if you already have much beard, I can also smear you with honey. But she didn't notice that. the first success, I think, the one about the book, she just got that. No, she got a performance from me in Kastrop-Rauxel. Hello, who laughs now? In a tent. What is there against Kastrop-Rauxel? It's such a great city. I'm more bothered by the term city than by great. I Kastrop-Rauxel. I it. I Kastrop-Rauxel too. You had the man C and A. That was Manhattan to me. True. Yes, yes. And there was a tent set up in the pre-Christmas area. Exactly, yes. Where in between a duck eats and then it is served and you read something under questionable acoustics. My mother was there and my little brother. And she said then, that was funny. And that was it. And then the book came and my mother thought she would have to die soon. What was tragic, really. And she didn't notice that anymore. But I learned, also with therapeutic help, I take her to the side and say, don't worry too much. And I think to myself, you have no idea. I don't think at all. And then that I don't think, what my mother would think. I don't even know what the man up there is thinking. What should I think about my mother? And I don't know what she would have said. Maybe, no idea. Maybe she could have said, you, I've made it all. And my mother would have said, yes, then let's clean your room. Could have been, no idea, I don't know. You let things that also fit into your stage program. Among other things, your grandma, that's of course always a particularly nice topic for rural residents. Yes, I'm sorry about your grandma. Yes. That was such a reference grandma, we call it. That was an absolute reference grandma. She brought to my life terms basketball knuckles. Basketball knuckles. Basketball knuckles. Basketball knuckles. That's not strange to you either as someone who comes from Waltrop. How far has your grandma been an inspiration source? Always. Grandmothers always deliver. Grandmothers, look, you have to look, your mother was a hard bone somehow and also funny and had a lot of fun. She had a lot of expectations that you couldn't fulfill or wanted to, but probably wanted to. Your grandma was free of it. Such a grandma makes such a cleaning, it's hard to explain. Grandmothers come to the world. I already notice how I want to get massively promoted. What's the point? And then they become mother themselves and then there is the next veneration process. Then the grandmothers have also been mothers. they are the highest form of human being. You're . Yes. And then there is the next veneration process. Then the grandmothers have also been mothers. they are the highest form of human being. That's how it is. And I have affected the pope. It remains the same. A grandmother has gone through a process that makes her the head of the family, which never happens. The grandmother then has a mascot character and in reality the grandmother is the last big instance that you should always ask. In all other cultures, ? Does that work? Yes. Not with us. With us, the grandmother is more of a rich post in the pocket. My grandmother was a titan. She was a titan. She was a titan. She was a titan. She was a titan. She was a titan. She was a titan. My grandmother was an incredible titan who said really crazy things don't go with strangers except them. And all those things where you really I think I'll do that. Yes. And that my mother and my grandmother was the best. That's . You take it as a given that grandmothers are cool. But my grandmother was Grandmothers are always particularly cool in retrospect. My grandmother was really lazy. That was really cool. Yes. She told me from the third floor get me some fresh bread and wrapped it in paper from the third floor and threw it down in the basement. She said she had a bunch of coins and threw them down and threw them down in the basement. They have a crater of two meters deep. I could be dead 400 times I could be dead because I always threw coins out of the balcony. And the house is still there from my grandmother. That seat was irrelevant but probably not. No. The house where I was born I was born on the couch Yes. At my grandmother. In Dortmund, ? In Dortmund-Eving. Yes. On the couch at my grandmother I had a I was born on the couch and moved to the next day not myself moved to Waltrup and there is still the building and I don't feel driving to Eving to get to the third floor and say hello my name is Sträter and go through and are completely consternated and say hello my name is Sträter and I'm in the ashes. One thing I still have to do. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.