Hey, hi everyone. My name is Jerry Wise, and this video is about narcissistic families and why nobody believes the scapegoat and what are some things you can do about that. I've been working with clients and folks for 40 to 45 years helping them explore and getting out of them their dysfunctional and narcissistic families of origin that they can be their true selves and not the self based on the narcissistic family. why does nobody believe the scapegoat? Let me share with you some things that might give you some understanding of that. Number one, character assassination. Scapegoats, impasse, and truth tellers often face chaos. Character attacks. Again, your motives are wrong. You're not stable. You don't have good integrity. You've messed up. You've made mistakes. how can we believe you? Secondly, a protection of the status quo. They will protect the status quo to keep it just as it is with you as the scapegoat and them as the in crowd and you as the out crowd to maintain that status quo. Then, of course, they don't have to look at their own issues as long as they keep that system in place. Thirdly, cognitive dissonance. One of the reasons why no one will believe the scapegoat because the scapegoat is sharing things that go against the family's malignant normalcy that go against the family beliefs and what is normal in the family that's actually toxic normalcy in the family. And , we have to look at our own issues as . And , we have to shut that down because it's just too painful and too difficult to consider that. Because if I consider the views of the scapegoat, that starts leading me down the path of reconsidering other views I have and other beliefs. And , they don't wish to do that. A good phrase for cognitive dissonance is, don't confuse me with the facts. These are my beliefs. And don't confuse me with the facts. That's someone who cannot handle cognitive dissonance and will therefore not believe the scapegoat and tell everybody else the scapegoat is wrong. Fourthly, the family's super self. The family's super self, which is a self that everyone partakes of as you're growing up in a family. We have these intergenerational selves that we partake of. You can think of a family. Jamie, how did you manage to find that super self? , it was a family. I was happy I found that super self. of it as group think group feel malignant normalcy however you want to think about that but it's that programmed way of thinking feeling behaving and it's that family super self that is present that makes the scapegoat not fit you cannot believe the scapegoat because they're not carrying the party line they're not telling the party line number five fear of repercussions acknowledging the truth or validity of a scapegoat's or empath's claims can imply the need for action which might include confronting uncomfortable truths or challenging powerful figures leading to potential social or professional repercussions we fear those repercussions scapegoat you just need to shut up and sit down because we can't accept those claims because if we did that's going to shake the system and i'm not sure i want to be punished by the higher-ups or those in more authority or parents or whatever sixth manipulation of information in some cases the flow of information is controlled or manipulated to discredit the information that's being said or the information that's being said or the information that's being said or the information that's being said or the information that's being said or the scapegoat or the truth teller by altering or withholding information influential individuals or groups can shape perceptions to align with their interests and again information is power information is currency in a narcissistic family and that can be manipulated in a way to encourage people to not believe the scapegoat number seven normalization of mistreatment if abusive or dysfunctional behavior is normalized within a setting or a family those who call it out as being abnormal can be seen as being reactive overly reactive or misinterpreting what was going on and misinterpret what others consider to be normal or acceptable i know your dad last night came home from work he was intoxicated or in a narcissistic manner and there was an act of misconduct and it was a physical act of misconduct rage. He beat all the kids. And then the next morning going, , your dad's having a hard time at work. And again, it's a normalization of mistreatment because you can't accept the scapegoat saying, I don't think it's that dad does that. And that is rejected. And the scapegoat will be scapegoated for even coming across as a truth teller in that respect. Number eight, a lack of supportive evidence. I think it's a little less frequent, but I think it happens often. The claims made by scapegoats or empaths involve subtle or covert forms of manipulation and abuse that don't leave a concrete evidence or clear footprints. And this absence of clear, tangible proof can make their claims easy to question or against. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. And I think it's important to be aware of that. Not just trying to ground the Alienare against. How do we get this off? And I think that becomes something that we should take into consideration every day is law. Or at least, we should take information into consideration beforeγα on our laws, do common sense Em tysome sue en obedient. IG And that's that lack of supportive evidence. And again, scapegoats and empaths have to make their argument always as beyond a reasonable doubt. They always have to have the highest bar that they have to reach to be believed. And then if they even reach that bar, they still won't be believed. what can we do? Focus on building a self. We even have to stop it being based on what others think. I don't think it's important that what others think is who you are. I think if you allow that to become too important to you, it's going to be problematic. Stop basing who you are on what they think, even if you are a scapegoat. Number two, focus on believing in yourself, even if others don't. And again, if they go, oh, , that never happened. No, Johnny never shot Mary. He's got the gun and it's smoking, but he never did that. good and that Johnny shot Mary, in terms of this analogy of reality. And Johnny did shoot Mary. And I'm not going to change my view of that. I think that happens often with either narcissists who are alcoholics or alcoholics who are not narcissists even, that don't you think mom's an alcoholic? And everybody's going, oh, no, no. No, she's not an alcoholic. And she has every symptom in the book of being an alcoholic. And you're supposed to believe that she's not. But she's having all kinds of difficulties and problems as a result of alcohol, alcohol ingestion and alcohol use and overuse. Thirdly, don't try to change others. Stop wasting your time trying to get the family to believe you're not the scapegoat. Or to not treat you a scapegoat. Focus on strengthening your emotional immune system. I don't care what you think. , let's use the example that everybody thinks mom is not an alcoholic, for example. And good and she is. I mean, it's just obvious. It's been obvious for years. And in fact, she's even gone for an assessment and been told she's an alcoholic. But the rest of the family, no, no, no. She just works hard. And she has a lot of stress. And, , and a lot of excuses. I don't have to change their view of it. I just have to hold on to my view of it. , I understand that's how you see it. But that's not how I see it. And as far as I know, it won't ever be different than how I see it. we're going to have problems or difficulties. I understand that. But, , I'm immune to your irrational way of seeing mom. I'm not going to. I'm not going to be overtaken by that. Or if they say, I don't know why you always cause trouble in the family. That's a scapegoat type of statement that you're always the one who's causing difficulties or you can't get along. , I'm sure that's how you perceive it because I've known you for a long time. If I'm talking to family members. However, I have never and I don't see it that way now. You're free to see it that way. I mean, they can still. See me and as a scapegoat, but I'm not going to accept scapegoat ism. And I'm going to behave in a way in which I am not a scapegoat. Now they can twist and turn it any way they want. , but I'm going to work on being more immune to that. And that's where detachment comes in. And again, why, if someone believes this stuff, do we continue to believe it because we've been programmed. And we want them to believe it. we want to unprogram ourselves about those beliefs, change the scapegoat in you versus what they believe about you being a scapegoat. And I think that's very critical. I've got a program that can help you with that called the road to self. It's listed down in the description. I hope you will check it out. There are a couple of books I would recommend. For the. People who have experienced being a scapegoat, rejected, shamed, and blamed help and hope for adults in the family scapegoat role by Rebecca C. Mandeville. Excellent book. Another book by Jay Reed, R E I D growing up as the scapegoat to narcissistic parents, a guide to healing. I would recommend those two for you. I hope you will subscribe. Comment and this video. I want to thank you for joining me today. Have a great day. And be wise.