Hi, my name is Dr. Fox, licensed psychologist in the state of Texas, and in this video we're going to discuss a very hard topic, abusive relationship. I'm going to discuss the four main categories of an emotionally abusive relationship, which can be a very complex dynamic and not always easy to identify when you're in it until you're deep in it. We will then identify the 10 signs of an abusive relationship, as what you can do about it and how you can heal from it. Please , share, subscribe, and let's take a look at the components of abusive relationships. In cases of psychological abuse, also known as emotional abuse, the abuser uses words and actions to frighten, control, and isolate their partner. Emotional abuse includes the following categories and signs of abusive behavior. The first is humiliation. This is insulting, criticizing, name-calling, embarrassing the other person in public, belittling their accomplishments, posting unflattering photos and videos of them on social media. That's humiliation. There's control. This is acting jealous and possessive, monitoring the other person's behavior, reading their texts and emails, demanding all their time and attention, pressuring them to use drugs or alcohol, using social media to track their activities, trying to control who they follow on social media. That is an act of측 Those are called a sexual abuse behavior that labels somebody who is really, if you can think about it, akhir fellowship. This is all reallyج Nordic and not sexual in the textile industry,ser 사람Õä nutritionistä social media aging off ïä ääÄáticaI control. Blaming and gaslighting. This is accusing the other person of cheating, denying abusive behavior, or blaming it on the victim. Claiming their problems are the other person's fault. That's blaming and gaslighting. The next one and the last one in this category is neglect and isolation. This is refusing to communicate, turning other people against the victim, withholding affection, preventing the other person from seeing friends or family. That is neglect and isolation. those are those four main categories. Now we're going to get into what the 10 signs of an abusive relationship are. As we go through this, ask yourself, am I in this type of relationship? Am I experiencing this? Now you can give yourself a range if you want. One is perhaps definitely no. Five can be definitely yes. Three is not too sure. Or you can just simply yes or no as we go through each. Let's get into it. Psychologically or mentally abusive relationships are especially insidious because the victim becomes accustomed to their partner's behavior, thinks it's normal, and has started to believe that what their abuser says about them. You internalize those statements and make them about yourself. We're going to go through these 10 signs, as I mentioned, and ask yourself if you've been in or out of an abusive relationship recently. In other words, what are you not allowed to do? What Choose? We're going to look at two factors that people run against when the partner says something and then the abuser says nothing. To start with, it's we don't do this. A lot of artists forget what they're dying to do. And I think that's going to be very hard. We're not going to talk about what we do. We'll talk about just what's going on, men and women, and time and time again. We all do invert a lot. You don't want to be afraid. you're not sure what you're sorry for in order to prevent their anger and complaints number three that's you don't talk about the relationship with your friends or family you avoid discussing the other person you minimize their abusive behavior or make excuses for it if your friends or family members call it out now number four is your partner love bombs you now this is when they try to make up for abusive behavior with repairing behavior that includes exaggerated compliments extravagant gifts or trips or telling you that they can't live without you it's important to remember that abuse is rarely 100 of the time a lot of times there is repairing behavior in an abusive relationship in the abusive cycle what happens is you have the abuse that occurs and that may happen for a while then you have the repairing then you may have a period of dormancy where there isn't really any abuse things maybe are tense but everyone kind of stays away from one another whatever it may be and then the abuse occurs again for whatever that may be then after the abuse is done then you have the repairing behavior which is again the love bombs that i just mentioned number five you feel everything that's wrong with the relationship is your fault emotional abuse often includes convincing the other person that they need to be criticized and told what to do but they're not going to be able to do it because they're not going to be able to do it because they're not going to be able to do it because they're not going to be able to do it because they're not going to do it because of their poor behavior and decision making ability and if they were better there wouldn't be a problem in the relationship number six is your disagreements turn into intense fights this rather than being productive arguments blow up into yelling and insults that feel very threatening and very scary number seven this is you never know which version of your partner you're gonna get very unpredictable they're hot and cold sometimes they're up and down sometimes withdrawing or insulting and then they draw you back in by being suddenly attentive and loving remember the love bombs of number four and a lot of times this can be what i to call narcissistic tease strategy which is at first they abuse you and they make you feel low which makes the narcissist feel very strong and powerful then once that person or if that person is able to is felt low enough small enough then they decide to leave then what happens is the narcissist or a lot of them can be very charming and very loving or they're very good at reading others and what they need then they see that they start to play on that then the person who was experiencing the abuse the receiver of the abuse then it's oh maybe he or she's changed and they go back and then again you end up on that cycle number eight you get shut down when you try to communicate the other person dismisses your needs or concerns or responds to them with sarcasm and disgust number nine you've lost confidence in your own perspective you've been told many times that you're wrong stupid or crazy that you've started to believe it remember whatever we tell ourselves over and over again will eventually be ingested and become part of our perception this can go for the negative certainly but it can also go for the positive try to catch those negatives replace them with positives balance thoughts about yourself genuine caring thoughts about yourself and the last one number 10 is you've forgotten what you used to be before the relationship you no longer spend time on your own doing things you care about or spending time with close friends that you don't remember what it felt to be a strong and independent person now some folks have never felt a strong and independent person i think in those instances what we need to do is we need to revisit how we would imagine ourselves or initially visit how we would imagine ourselves to be that strong and independent person what would that be what are those components get as concrete and clear as you can in what are those traits what are those traits that you admire in other people that seem strong and independent how can you get those traits learning different ways of thinking and behaving it doesn't always happen after you go to a place a first level instance a new experience some people go to other schools because they're feeling very depressed they feel the same as somebody whatever that wall is really hard to understand what's happening but really i think it's really important to build that relationship with your interactions by analyzing the ресur業's counterfle gestellt v what's happening what's happening in social interactions what's happening in communityındews and close anymorenonevenet corpo and happened challenging those things and doing those things differently if you answer yes and feel you're in an abusive relationship it's important to take steps to repair the damage that's done to your self-worth self-confidence independence and ability to trust others recovering from emotional abuse starts with recognizing that the abuse took place rather than minimizing or denying it to yourself the next step is to start challenging those mental patterns that are linked to the abuse we just talked about those a lot of those self-degrading comments and statements now this can also include shifting negative thoughts and beliefs such as thinking the abuse was your fault that you will never be in a healthy relationship or that you could have done something different that would have prevented the abuse in addition healing from an emotionally abusive relationship involves honoring your own needs and desires by doing what you love and what makes you true and that's what I'm talking about here today this is the most important thing that you need to know about yourself you need to be aware of your own needs and desires by doing what you love and what makes you true and that's what I'm talking about here today is to start thinking about how to improve your emotional abuse. truly happy. This includes promoting authentic connections with trusted friends who have your best interests at heart and placing self-care or rebalance your nervous system after the chronic stress of an abusive relationship. Lastly, please find a mental health provider to help you work through this and change those patterns that kept you in and perhaps continuing to seek relationships with a high probability of abuse. What I'm saying is that I think that we have a tendency to seek out other individuals that are likely to fulfill the patterns that we learned when we were younger. what it is about changing those perceptions, about changing those patterns, and you can absolutely do this. In the comments section, there are two websites that can help you get help. please check them out if you feel that you're in an abusive relationship. Thank you. And I wish you all the best. Please leave comments if you've successfully gotten out of an abusive relationship. How did you recognize it? How did you get out? Who helped you? Please leave positive comments that people can hear, that they can learn from and go forward. That's one of the great things about this channel is that I think a lot of the viewers, folks you who have seen this channel, are finding great benefit and leaving great comments that are helping others. And that is what really motivates me to keep doing this. thank you all very much. , share and subscribe. Please stay safe and be . Thank you. Bye.