Welcome everyone. My name is Kristen Snowden. I'm a licensed therapist in the state of California, and I try to post monthly or every other month free webinars related to all things related to relationship crisis, how to move through relationship crisis, develop a better language for understanding what's going on in the crisis, evidence-based tools to get through it to the other side, a supportive guidance-based environment where you can kind of not feel alone and move through this. But today we're going to be discussing one of the most powerful tools that I know of to use to heal after betrayal trauma. It's called the polyvagal theory, and it really provides a helpful model to understand what's going on inside your body, how trauma really wires or kind of wreaks havoc, on your nervous system. And the polyvagal theory can really break down a very complex system into a simple way to help you reincorporate tools, everyday practices that can help you feel you are regaining control and agency in your life, in your body, in your mind, in your emotions, again, because any of you, pretty much most of you are here because you've been through some kind of relationship crisis. And I want to talk to you about some of the tools that you can use to heal after betrayal trauma. And I think you can all understand this feeling that your body's just taken over, that you just don't feel you have control of your thoughts and your emotions and everything. And you really grieve the loss of that. this polyvagal theory can help you a lot with that particular problem. being betrayed by a trusted loved one can be one of the most traumatizing experiences. And I want to talk to you about some of the tools that you can use to help you, many of us may not have one, to be feeling this way or the opposite, to realize that the pain or the distress of survival and60 live as a spoilsport for being wrong veggie or delinquents wait to ever let go. Those tools can be traveled to someone else. somebody can feel free to , Syижý with the power of that is, of us to be mean or close to someone with different voice or being aggressive orую know, anything can be. And trulyPower is what you all feel you reenact? проход if you don't feel trying to change yourself and your lack most often, ca channelچion in the chat ? mind and body. Being betrayed by the one you've trusted most causes your brain to essentially have to split into two, split into this impossible idea that the person that you have loved and trusted the most and made yourself most vulnerable to is now the person that has harmed you the most, is the person that is least trustworthy. And you're not really sure if you're ever going to feel safe or be able to trust anyone, not just this person, but anyone ever again. And even if the trauma of discovering this particular betrayal, this addiction or infidelity or uncovering some kind of big unknown thing, even if that incident has passed, it has come and gone, and maybe you're in a repair state, the trauma, the betrayal can become imprinted into your body. And it can wreak havoc on everything about your lifestyle, everything about how you show up and operate physically, emotionally. It can show up as unwelcome flashbacks, bursts of anger or sadness that just kind of feel out of nowhere, constant hypervigilance, just this fear and anxiety perseverating around your partner, the betrayal. And much, much more feelings of hopelessness. It can feel an emotional and physical roller coaster that causes actual physical harm to your body. And most importantly, it makes you feel powerless or out of control. you have no agency. You've been thrown on this roller coaster and you don't get to decide when you get off. And it is really important for trauma or betrayal trauma therapists to help you feel you're in a state of hopelessness. And it's really important for trauma therapists to help you unwire that or change that framework in your body, the mentality that I don't get choice here. Trauma recovery is all about returning choice back to you. that's what one of these, that's what polyvagal can help you with. the cause of these post trauma symptoms come from our brains, learning and survival system. When something really scary, unpredictable, powerless, happens in our life, our brain locks it deep into our nervous system, kind of into every fiber of our life, our muscles, our bodies, everything where they can resurface at any given moment, due to even just the tiniest of triggers. It impacts not only how I'll show up just in my relationship with the betrayer, the person who's harmed me, but it's, it leaks into every other facet of my life. Dr. Steven Porges is the one who created this framework, the polyvagal theory, and he provides the framework for understanding how our autonomic nervous system regulates our responses to stress and trauma. It's important to know that while our brain in a state of trauma really deeply wires and records, this is this person is scary. Don't trust anyone. This world is chaotic. Don't ever make yourself vulnerable again, or you're pathetic or you're Gusty. I'm , you're not worth it. Tara D. Walton, M.D.: You're not worth it. I only have one or two people that I trust, but, but that's , if you don't trust anyone, it's , I don't trust anyone, I'll never be able to help you. you're pathetic or, , incapable, incapable of keeping yourself safe, all these stories that get deeply recorded in you, it is neuroplastic. meaning it is changeable. These things are not permanent, they feel permanent, they feel you're never going to return to normalcy ever again. But through a lot of work, rewiring, practice, training, , breathing, it can slowly but surely be rewired. I want to bring hope to those who are feeling life has been pretty hopeless lately. the format of this lecture is going to be I'm first going to briefly discuss all how the brain and body and nervous system get disrupted due to betrayal trauma. Then I'm going to explain Dr. Stephen Porges is polyvagal theory, and then how you can apply the model to your everyday healing practices to either down regulate if you're very hyper vigilant, anxious, stressed, or up regulated if you tend to be someone who's more shut down, dissociated, can't get out of bed, can't, , get one thought out straight, etc. And most importantly, return some agency, choice control back to your life again. When we all know that's what trauma does, it just robs you, kidnaps you, and then it's , oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, , I'm not going to do this again, because I'm going to do it again, because I'm going to do it again, because I'm going to do it again, because I have such a great opportunity to do this again, because I have such a great opportunity to do this again, and feeling you're in control of your life again. I'm going to list a few things that are consequences, physiological and social consequences, environmental consequences to betrayal trauma, just you can kind of understand or name what might be going on in your life because of these traumas that have occurred. And understand that, I said, even if the threat or the uncovering of this information has already passed, ? theoretically, let's say you're still repairing the relationship. The person is remorseful. You're trying to get through to the other side. These symptoms will still occur because your body will still feel safe. But tack on the fact that if none of that has happened, your betrayed partner is still acting out. You're still getting trickle disclosures. Maybe you are getting met with someone who is invalidating or not remorseful for what he or she has done. These symptoms will just be increased on many, many different levels. here are a few things that happen after you have uncovered betrayal. And again, this is due to maybe infidelity, sexual acting out, pornography use, even uncovering substance abuse. Addictions that you weren't aware of, spending large amounts of money, your partner not helping you feel safe, being invalidated, feeling abandoned emotionally, et cetera. These are all types of betrayals that we're talking about here. First and foremost, it increases your stress hormones. When your body gets a sign that there's a threat, it'll increase the cortisol and stress to try to keep you safe. , does anything and everything. And a threat doesn't need to be a gun to your head. A threat can be your person, your primary relationship and the money and the life and the family you have all intertwined with this person is now being threatened. And that is as good as someone threatening your life. you'll have increased stress hormones all the time often. Then therefore, there'll often be an increased fight or flight response. again, a heightened arousal, heightened anxiety, heightened, literally wanting to fight, argue, scream, or run away, shut down, et cetera. Speaking of that, there'll be an increased time where when your nervous system gets overwhelmed from the hyper arousal from constantly, , feeling unsafe, feeling hurt, feeling angry, all these things, the fight or flight responses cause you to do, it'll move into a shutdown or numbness state. You'll want to sleep more. Your brain will be more active. You'll want to sleep more. Your brain will be more active. Your brain won't work anymore. You won't be able to put together thoughts. You'll find yourself dissociated. There's this concept called depersonalization where you just kind of feel you're removed from your body and you feel you're watching what's happening from an outside window looking in , is this my life? I can't believe this is my life. This is a, just a terrible show I'm watching on TV. Another symptom is depression and, and hopelessness increased hyper vigilance. Many of you betrayed partners have become P have gotten PhDs in detective work, searching computers, , searching phones. You could join the CIA or FBI after all of this, because you become masterful at managing your hyper vigilance, trying to find out if your partner's been lying to you or acting out still disrupted social engagement, this is huge. But I said, when you have. found that your primary partner is not trustworthy, your brain is not, cannot be that specific. It can't just be , oh, only this person's untrustworthy. I'm only going to struggle with trusting this one person. Your brain is highly generalized because, , it just wants to blanket, say, , all of this is unsafe because it's just, it's first directive is to keep you safe. And if I just tell you everything is dangerous, then maybe I'll keep you safer. ? It's your survival system is highly efficient and extremely generalized, but not always accurate. your social engagement, your desire or ability to engage socially spans to your entire environment. , betrayed partners, I always say it's really important for you to join a betrayed partners group. the ones that I have or that sex and relationship healing.com has, or several other experts in this field have, because we know it's such an isolating experience. When the person's hurt you the most, that you love the most and made yourself most vulnerable to the last thing on earth you want to do is to share your story is to open yourself up to other people to judgment. And of course, there's always these stories too, that it's , what if I share what my partner did to me? And then we say, oh, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Now I was sort of , Hey, this is , Pub and I was, it's explanation. I になり my husband'sрок. We were totally confused. Another sign and symptom is what I'd already talked about, difficulty trusting, not just your partner, not just other people, but yourself. Hey, I married this person, clearly I can't tell when someone is lying. It's this very scary idea that I don't have the basic skills to keep myself alive and safe, and it turns you upside down. there's difficulty even just trusting yourself. Problems with intimacy. This can happen in multiple ways. Intimacy happens not just physically through sex and hugs and kisses, but it can happen emotionally. It can happen spiritually, intellectually. You will struggle with wanting to share intimacy with everybody on all fronts, spiritually, intellectually. You don't want to share your opinions because you don't trust your opinions. Emotions. Sometimes after all this gouging. Gaslighting and manipulation. You have these shame stories going on that you want too much. You ask for too much. This whole package is just too much. you're constantly questioning what is too needy? What do I need to ask for? you really, really hold back on intimacy, on showing yourself to other people, on being authentic and connected with people, which again is very opposite of what you need. You need to heal. But in addition to the symptoms I just said, there's also thematic symptoms. meaning physiological symptoms, chronic stress and trauma can lead to physical symptoms headaches, gastrointestinal issues, fatigue, getting disoriented, brain fog, chronic pain, et cetera. There's also emotional distress. persistent and sometimes a surprise. -huh. Symptoms of feeling angry, sadness, confusion. Then there's also the intrusive memories. Song can trigger intrusive memories. A flashback. Your partner may be actually on the mend and repairing and then all of a sudden you're just , get away, you monster. Don't touch me. You're a horrible person. And then a thing that we're going to talk about mainly here now is this difficulty. With emotional regulation. You can feel almost a teenager again or a toddler again where they just kind of throw themselves on the ground and they're having a tired, overwhelmed tantrum because they just don't know how to come up with their feelings to speak it, to share it. And sometimes betrayed partners feel that. They just feel out of control and their inability to kind of reel it in and help themselves feel. Safe and soothed again. . here's the Bali bagel theory in a nutshell. . What I really about it is again, we think this, the, the autonomic nervous system, we all have it. You don't want to wipe it away. I know when we're in crisis and it feels it is driving this crazy train and we can't get off and it's scary and we want to crawl out of our skin. We feel stressed and overwhelmed all the time. . We wish that we didn't have this survival system, but we still want the survival system to help us jump out of the way of a car. That's moving too fast. That has a reflex that pushes down on the opposite leg. When we step on something sharp with one leg, , we want these reflexes and responses, but we also want to constantly keep in mind that we have this thing called the prefrontal cortex. It is the higher functioning version of us. Of this and thank God for it because it can. . It's a little bit more complicated than it is. It's a little bit more complex than it is. But it's a little bit more complicated than it is. I want you to realize that. And I want you to realize that. And I want you to realize that. , Stephen Porges. Let me just tell you a couple important things. The autonomic nervous system is an automatic involuntary system in our life. It is running on the backdrop all the time. every time you enter a room, every time you open your eyes or hear anything, it is all about listening first and foremost, noting threats. Who's moving in a funny way. Tones of voice. Nonverbal cues. Looking around in our environment. Hearing things. These are all things that are constantly running around in the background trying to say, , is there a threat? How do I keep myself safe? he says there's essentially three phases to the nervous system. I guess hierarchy. He says first there's the ventral vagal state. ventral vagal is we're social. We're engaged. let's say we're talking to a good friend. Or we're in a meeting and engaged in the meeting. Or we're having a good time and doing something fun with some family. This is the safe, social, connected, engaged phase. This is when we're able to be present. When my prefrontal cortex is able to be Kristen. When I can think about consequences. When I can think about who am I and how do I want to show up. , doing actually real intimacy, I said. Physical, emotional, intellectual, spiritual connection. The different senses that I'm Studied from. Absolutely. Sometimes that's kind of hard to say or flavors it for some reason, although it kind of feels I'm capsule kind of spending time with myself, because I'm thinking to myself, all this is expensive now, that. My prefrontal cortex is obviously highly hyperactive now grind. And it's allCA mów oo and DXA. And that's kind of tough for me, just saying that it time for some, , , what's going on with the functioning. Next? Listen here. with stress hormones saying what do i need do i need to fight this out do we need to run away from this how do i get out of this stage or this level of threat what do i need to do i need to scream do i need to fight back do i need to become a highly trained detective to constantly search my partner's phone and websites this is all sympathetic it's kind of creating this list of things that you need to do it's the action part of the nervous system move into action mobilized then when your nervous system gets entirely overwhelmed it gets flooded because it's exhausted it'll move into dorsal vagal the best way i know to describe it is stephen poor just mentions that regarding our nervous system we're phenomenologically related to the turtle and what happens anytime a turtle feels threatened it does not run away because it's not an option it can't really fight it's not capable of that it will always move into its shell and that's the best way to remember the state we get into when we're in dorsal vagal we are not social and connected we are not mobilized we are not acting we are immobilized with fear in a shutdown mode stephen poor just calls it freeze or collapse i just call it do not path go do not collect 200 i am in an overwhelmed state that's when people will just fall asleep sometimes it'll cause they'll throw up they'll have a migraine these are all signs that your nervous system is completely overwhelmed and just needs to stop and it's just important to listen to that part of your body that's telling you to stop these are all really great questions to ask the first step in learning how to regulate your dysregulated nervous system is to really start getting to know the nervous system this is i believe this is on my website but you're welcome to write me and ask at kristin snodden mft at gmail dot com if you don't if this isn't on my website kristin stone.com but this is a get to know your nervous system for sure i love you and i'll see you in our next video bye phases? What does it look when you are in ventral vagal, when you're social, connected, engaged? What does it feel in your body? What does it feel when you're in the sympathetic, mobilized, kind of going and going stage? And then conversely, dorsal vagal when you're shut down. I write this all down. What I would encourage you all to do is to print this out and write your own version of what these answers are to all these questions. Think of an event where you were in one of these states. What does it look ? Because it really personalizes it for you. How does your body feel in this particular state? What would you call this state? What are your own words for it? for me, I put congruent and aware. For sympathetic, I call it over-functioning, annoyed. Flustered. Action. Doing the things. Making the list. Pushing myself through the discomfort. And then what kind of coping skills do you use? I do a lot of running. I do the list making. I do the yelling. I try to be breathing during that time, but it's hard. I do a lot of victimizing, , oh, poor me and my giant list of things that I have to do, that righteous indignation that I'm completely overwhelmed. And it's everybody's fault. That's a calm version of the sympathetic state. And then what's the story you tell yourself, ? here is answer the following for each state. The world is blank. I am blank. it's, my words are, I'm failing. I need to over-function in order to get back to not failing. Dorsal vagal, , for me, it's, I can't process. I can't think rationally. I feel lost. The story I tell myself is not, not only am I not, functioning anymore, I'm under functioning and I'm now a failure. I've, I've crossed into failure zone. it's every nervous system is different. it's really important that you take the time and it might be surprising to you to find out the stories you tell yourself in these nervous system states. Because again, understanding what the physical state feels , the stories you're telling yourself, it's not just about the physical state. It's about the state of your mind, your mind, your body, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, your mind, the behaviors, ? The coping skills, the things you're doing in that state. These will all be indications of , oh, I'm in sympathetic. , something happened. Stop, look and listen. What was the threat that caused me to get here? And then you can start moving from there. again, it's re-inviting agency to your life, re-inviting choice and control to your life. Cause remember you don't have control of the environment, but you have control of yourself and what you want to do in these moments of crisis. first get to know your nervous system. The second is start identifying skills for up and down regulation. a thing that I definitely have on my website is it's called a self-care menu. It's on kristinsnowden.com. And these are just a list of potential up and down regulation, ? if I'm in dorsal vagal and I'm in shutdown mode and I'm sleeping and I'm not moving, these are lists of some of these things that I need to do to re-engage the world to upregulate myself. Conversely, if I am hypervigilant running around, feeling I'm running around with my, a chicken with my head cut off, feeling overwhelmed, feeling victimized, feeling I can never just get through this. You can start using some of these tactics, to downregulate what we call engage the parasympathetic state, sympathetics up, parasympathetic down. A little note, by the way, the most accessible intervention is always breathing. Little fact, when you breathe in, you upregulate your sympathetic system. When you exhale, you downregulate, upregulate, downregulate. stopping and reminding yourself that your breath in and of itself, can up and downregulate is fantastic. And then there's also these grounding techniques. If you've seen my webinars before, I to trick my brain into getting into higher functioning thought. If you stay curious, ask questions, and then go through some complex concepts, it throws your brain into higher functioning systems that it can't be in that fight, flight, freeze state. my client, my clients always laugh, but I say, start counting backwards from 100 by seven. , just try it. No one can just run through it quickly. But you have to think about that. Or, , start naming the things that you see in the room, feel your butt in the seat, do that deep breathing. Say, , four names of boys that start with an H, , three girls names that start with a W. These are all really quick, accessible things that you can do that pull your body out of that. . That fight, flight, freeze, , sympathetic or dorsal stage and get your juices flowing and return agency to your body again. , here's a couple other things that once you learn your nervous system, start testing out that menu of items that I sent you because again, your nervous system is a fingerprint. It's totally different and unique to you based on your own traumas, all the information and learning that your brain's been doing over the. Last years of your existence. things that up and down regulate me are going to be different than things that up and down regulate another person. I can't sit here and be , do these five things. This is going to get you back to stability. No, because hugging a dog and loving on them might be great and wonderful and healing for one person. And then someone who's been attacked by dogs, having them in a presence in their presence will only upregulate them and re trigger trauma. Hugging someone can be healing and wonderful. Sometimes it's more dysregulating. you need to learn especially by the way we go to a lot of this to our phone, when we are in a numbing or an overwhelmed state, really pay attention to does zooming through or scrolling through an Instagram or social media or watching videos? Is that a healing thing? Does it calm you and recenter you? Or do you find it to be dysregulating? And pay attention how when you do join groups, how is the group helping you feel that way? , those are all things that you have to kind of do your own work, and your own trial and error. And sometimes might help be helpful to create a journal of , I took a walk in nature that definitely down regulated me. I called my friend Susie and she only upregulated me but then when I called my friend Joni, that helped. Joni is more helpful. Susie is not much helpful. Things that. I'm talking to a therapist helped joining a group helped, etc. , , let's go over some other things that you can do promote a safe and calm environment, create your own safe environment. Because God knows you don't have control of your partner if he or she will ever be in recovery or tell the truth ever again. You can't control how other people might judge you or the situation. You have to work really hard to try to create your glimmers your moments of stability of , I can do this, I can survive. I can make meaning from this somehow some way and grow from this somehow some way. You might need to reduce noise, you might need to set your phone down, you might need to dim the lights, create some comfortable secure space, some people need to move out of the rooms or out of the homes of the acting out partner, because that's just creating a safer space for them. Go on a trip away from them. I don't know, you got to think about that. , we engage that ventral vagal stage, , that social connected engaged stage that will help when you are looking into the eyes of a safe, down regulated person, your I was joke, we have superpowers, ? I can walk into a room and I can use my hands and gestures and the tone of my voice to up regulate everybody else. And sure enough, we're such social creatures, that if you watch me and engage me, your stress hormones and your heart rate will suddenly match mine. And conversely, if I can show up in a room and be calmer, and use calm eye contact, slow body movements, slow breathing, validating comments, affirming comments, my down regulated nervous system will help your nervous system match. engage that social ventral vagal system, you need social connection, safe face to face connection, you do as scary as it is need intimacy, you need to go to a place in space where you can share your story usually has to be with other people who suffered and struggled in a similar way they can understand and they can hear it and validate it in a non judgmental way. But you need to share your story, you can't keep it all up, up here. It's not going to work. And it's not going to ever process out. You need to incorporate using body techniques. Vander Kolk, Professor Vander Kolk, the body keeps score, he talks about how much your body locks in trauma and stress and how actually important it is to use the body to release it. And actually, , Peter, Sylvain, he who created somatic experience that a therapeutic intervention, he watched wildlife for a long time when they've been exposed to threats and harm. And they find they have a very physical way of kind of having seizures and convulsions and working out the traumatic stress experience and then move back into the herd and carry on in their life. it is important. It sounds crazy, especially, , I'm a type A control freak that , I do the power yoga, but I would never want to sit for the 10 minutes afterward, where they just lay there, just felt made no sense to me or just doing nothing. And I don't do nothing. I always produce that, , always sympathetic state. And it's important to incorporate those things where you're just doing mind body connection, you're just paying attention to how am I feeling? Where am I feeling it? internal family systems, Dick Schwartz stuff, his parts work, he has a lot of free stuff on the internet. Frank Anderson's the other guy too, you can search where they just do meditations about , what's upsetting to you now. Let's talk about the anxiety. Does it have a name with stories around the anxiety? How do you feel towards the anxiety? If the anxiety wasn't anxious all the time? What was it? What would it be afraid would happen? If it let go of the anxiety? What would he be afraid would these are all again, my 20 something year old self would be kicking my 24 year old self but and be , that's such hippie crazy stuff. But it's important. There is a mind body connection that is important for you. , a social connection, and a mind body connection that you have to use to move through the trauma. mind body deep breathing, practice diaphragmatic breathing, deeply breathe deeply belly breathing. Do those physical scans in your body. Do body based therapist therapy yoga, Tai Chi, dance therapies, , sing and dance in the kitchen, gentle movement, big giant fat movement, punch pillows, it, you got to do it. Try it. , working out things that going for walks, progressive muscle relaxation. I talked about this for a second, but practice mindfulness and meditation, engage in these practices. And then you're going to get into the next step. And then you're going to get into the next step. And then you're going to get into the next step. And then you're going to get into the next step. Again, you're trying to move out of that sympathetic do where I'm just doing and I'm over functioning. And that under functioning, where I'm just I'm shut down. And we're trying to move back to being aware and present and congruent of , what were my goals? What am I going for here? What Who am I? What are my boundaries? What are my non negotiables? Who How do I want to show up? That all happens in ventral bagel. we're trying to bring back the present, the now, not be back, taken back onto that trauma roller coaster where we are going down crazy town. next is engage in the soothing activity. again, that menu of items, find out what is soothing. Sometimes massage is soothing. Sometimes it's the worst place in the world to lay there and have someone touch your body. , especially the nature of the betrayal trauma due to sex and pornography addiction. But some people that might be great for them. you need to figure out what kind of soothing activity works for you some kind of hobby, nature exposure, find out what it is. grounding techniques, comforting rituals, ? There's some people the ones I think who kind of make it out of these rituals where they do their group, they go to their meetings, they do their book studies, they have their coffee or tea in the morning, and they go to their therapist, they go for a walk with their dog. They have the daily check in with their partner. It is really important to create some kind of structure or ritual. I always explain it through the terms of military drilling, the way the military frames their soldiers or seamen or whoever airmen is they go over again. This is what you do. This is how you respond. This is who you listen to. These are the orders you follow. Because the idea is that when we're in crisis and we're in a mode where we're afraid for our life, we have to fall back on that training, on that muscle memory. , just look to my leader, take advice from them. , do these four things because I trained on them six times. you have to incorporate some level of structure and ritual. Use sensory and auditory stimuli, visual auditory stimuli, temperature regulation. warm baths, cold packs. Someone's talking about how they use sauna and cold plunge and it works really for them. It helps really heal or just re-stabilize their nervous system. Self-talk, self-soothing, self-touching. I find this to be helpful. Sometimes people just do this. They hold and hug pillows. Doing the eye, stimulation. There's also the bi-tappers. I'm trying to find my bi-tappers. But they buzz in each hand. Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz. Or listening, auditory stimulation. Those can all be helpful stimulation. Let's see what else. Therapy. Obviously, you can go to a -trained therapist who knows how to use trauma-informed therapy such as EMDR, eye movement desensitization reprocessing, somatic experiencing, internal family systems. And collaboration and supportive approach. Remember, social engagement with safe, non-judgmental people is very, very important to the healing process. try to identify. Don't lock yourself up or isolate yourself. Go out to these betrayed partners groups. Maybe the first one doesn't work. Maybe the second one doesn't work. But you have to find a group of people. I've been really fortunate. All of my groups, I run into people who are really, really, phenomenal men and women who show such strength and courage. I admire them all deeply. And one of my greatest joys is watching them all find each other under such sad, heartbreaking circumstances. But it's incredible to see them support one another, validate each other, and make meaning from this tragedy. And that they've been able to reach out across the country or across the world and share their stories and comfort others who've struggled in a way that they've never been able to. That is healing, in my opinion. And I would really encourage you all to do that. And just I'm going to remind you, look at that menu of self-care options. I have other videos on Stephen Porges' Autonomic Nervous System Polyvagal Theory. Reach out to me, Kristen Snowden, MFT at Gmail, or I'm on Instagram, or subscribe to my YouTube channel. These are all ways to reach out to me for resources. And that's it. Great stuff. , I thought it was interesting when you shared that both in sympathetic and in dorsal, failure, I'm failing. it was the same word you used as the end result in either of those states. it wasn't , , in this state, I do this, and in this state, I'm that. it comes down to I'm not winning at life kind of thing. . And it's the story you tell yourself. And I always find the story you tell yourself is tied into your story. And I think that's a great way to do that. And I think that's a great way to do that. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . That makes sense. . know, I talk about one of the big hits from this betrayal is it really brings your shame up to the surface. And you really have to do work around that. But you'll find it's tied in, ? One of my biggest stories is that I am valuable as long as I'm productive, I'm producing, I'm offering something to the world. And , I'm doing it in a, , effective manner. And when I'm in crisis, or when I my plates too full, it starts breaking down. And it's bringing up those shame voices. Oh, , who are you then? If you have to start saying no to clients? Who are you then if you can't produce these 25 things today? you gross, you're just lazy, then you're failing, you're breaking down. you really find out that the nervous system ties into that shame story. And they're really intertwined. And that's the importance of needing to do the work to identify the stories you tell yourself in each of these stages. I always tell clients what happened to you was not your fault. Not one thing about it. Your partner had choices and he or she decided to lie and manipulate and keep really important information from you. None of that is your fault. And I'm sorry, you've been traumatized. But now that has happened, it's now become your responsibility to figure out how to unwire your trauma body and come up with some skills and interventions to really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, be stabilized after you've been traumatized. And again, I'm sorry, you didn't ask for any of this. But if there's anything you're responsible for, it's that latter piece. , the next one betrayed husband here, sex addiction is not necessarily involved. Do of any true group therapy that targets unfaithful women where sex addiction may or may not be involved? Do any of any group therapy that allows men for my situation? Yes. But are men only? I now have a co-ed betrayed partners group because I, my heart hurt for all the men that would reach out to me and not have a place in space to talk about this. I actually do have a, now I have a betrayed partners group. There's 14 of them. I'd say there's five men. The rest are women. And some are experiencing infidelity or betrayal trauma because of sex addiction, but some, there was maybe a season of betrayal and infidelity, . Versus a more consistent long-term pattern of addictive compulsive behaviors. I've done it twice far, far, good. yes, check out kristinsnowden.com. And I now have a co-ed group. We are out of time. Oh goodness. How that flew by. thank you, Kristen. Thanks everyone, for showing up today. Kristen will be back with another great webinar. thanks everyone. And this will be posted on our website. Hopefully yet today. Thanks everybody. Thank you much for coming.