Hey everyone, it's Dr. Ramani. Let's talk about consequences, ? Consequences are what happen after a behavior and shape whether that behavior happens again. what kinds of consequences matter to a narcissistic person? The universal piece is that consequences shape behavior, but the other piece is what consequences matter. we know blah, blah, blah, narcissistic people won't change, but we often need to make these relationships work. And the only way that can happen is if we can shape their behavior somewhat, ? The way we shape anyone's behavior is the consequences we set for someone's behavior. Behavior is shaped by consequences, ? Pay me extra for the extra work. I'm going to want to keep doing the extra work. Give a person frequent, flyer miles and perks, they may keep flying your airline. Give a kid a gold star, he may keep making his bed, ? It's not quite that simple, but it's also kind of that simple, ? I mean, listen, with animals, this is much easier. Food is almost always rewarding for every animal, ? You give your pup a treat after they do whatever thing you want them to do, and we assume that they keep getting the treat. When they keep doing the thing you want, we can shape their behavior they'll keep learning to do the thing we want them to do. They'll keep doing the thing we want them to do, and we can shape their behavior. they'll keep learning to do the thing we want them to do. They'll keep learning to do the thing we want them to do. They'll become a habit. Every often we'll reward them, and that'll be enough. For people, this can be a lot more complicated. Because with people, unlike animals, where food is almost always rewarding, we have to figure out what is rewarding for someone, ? If you give that person who does that extra work just five bucks, that may not be enough to interest them in doing that again. But a much more meaningful amount of money, or perhaps something that might be even more meaningful to them, maybe a day off, or a better party, or maybe a day off, or maybe a parking spot, that may then result in the desired behavior to repeat. We gotta figure out for each person what matters. Now that's rewards, ? That stuff's called positive reinforcement. But what about other kinds of consequences? Punishment, for example, is a consequence, ? We give someone something aversive. We do something to someone that's aversive with the goal that they stop the behavior. A speeding ticket, being grounded for coming home late, docking a person's pay for not showing up. You want them to stop the thing they're doing, you penalize them, ? Now punishment, we know, doesn't work as those rewards, as that positive reinforcement to shape behavior. But if a consequence is aversive enough, losing a driver's license, missing out on a really a fun event, losing a job, then just the possibility of the consequence may be enough to keep a person in line. And you don't even have to deliver the consequence, because they don't want it to happen. But the consequence of the behavior has to be meaningful to a person if it's going to change or shape their behavior. And this is where it gets tricky with narcissistic folks. Many of you may think, listen, I can't get out of this relationship, or I have to have an ongoing contact with this person. I have to figure out some kind of consequence, their behavior isn't awful. Or you may want to figure out a reward that will get them to repeat a behavior that you want them to do. Let's break down this whole consequence problem a little bit. first, when you're thinking about this in terms of narcissistic people, let's start with what is meaningful to narcissistic people as a reward. For most narcissistic folks, validation and admiration and other clear sources of narcissistic supply are incredibly motivating. that will include effusive praise, attention, applause, being told they're great, overblown gratitude. It may also be proximity to important people or VIPs or people whom they perceive to be VIPs or being at the concert, the event, the party, whatever the hit or the bad. And it's a lot of things that are important to them. let's start with the reward. let's start with the reward. let's start with the reward. First of all, think about what the hip or cultural credit that gives them status is. Other things may include high status items, cars, clothing, jewelry, watches, boats. Now, since you are not going to give a narcissistic person a boat for emptying the trash, do keep in mind that other rewards such as giving them lots of praise. But then you have to be careful, because all that praise can't seem fake. But then you have to be careful, because all that praise can't seem fake. Because for all of the narcissistic person's lack of empathy and disconnection, they actually have a really low level of pleasure, which makes it the most important thing for them to do. You don't want to give them credit. really honed sense of when they are being spoken to they're an eight-year-old child oh you took out the trash oh my god my sweetie needs to be something a little more subtle hey thanks much for getting the trash out helpful to me I know how busy you've been thank you much for doing that I appreciate it that means I can go take care of this now you're going to want to throw up after saying that to them especially since they may only take out the trash one out of every 10 times but it may up the odds that they might do it two out of every 10 times remember it's all about supply and supply is the only thing that matters to them if you want them to do something again or keep doing something figure out what kind of supply is meaningful to them it's not all created the same and give that to them if you can it may also be part of a fluffing strategy that you need to do to get something done you figure out what kind of supply they most offer it up get them to do the thing you need and be done with it does that feel manipulative sure but it's kids play compared to the kind of manipulation you're enduring in this relationship and remember your supply doesn't always work as someone else's you can only get far with them now what about what I call the dark rewards narcissistic supply isn't just praise and prizes and validation and stuff and status narcissistic supply can also be the narcissist getting a rise or a strong emotional reaction out of someone else when they do that it's its own form of supply because it allows a narcissistic person to feel dominant in control and to maintain their identity as the strong one and subsequently label you as weak because you're emotional it can also be supply for them to witness to witness only to sort of an outside element of thoseействis or people that continue to share order these are spl wannas obten te incу to witness someone fail or lose or watch someone experience anything that allows them to think of themselves as great and the other person as less. If the narcissistic person is mad at someone or believes that they have been wronged by someone, it may also be either seeing the narcissistic person's own attempt at getting revenge succeed or watching that the person that they perceive as doing them wrong going down. If the narcissistic person thinks their revenge is working or their baiting is working, they're going to keep doing it. That's tricky. What do you do with consequences there? you might be thinking, but what about when they do things that I do not ? What about those behaviors I just want them to stop? What then? Now that gets a lot more complicated. If we know what constitutes the strongest narcissistic supply for them, , we can build on that to figure out what will make them. Uncomfortable. And that would be losing supply, less attention, admiration, and validation, taking those things away. when they're yammering on one more time about something in their life, that's they don't , or that they don't agree with, or someone's doing them wrong. Don't engage with them. This is why techniques gray rock exist. It's basically a way of taking away narcissistic supply. Another sort of way of giving a consequence. It's by not noticing something in them. They're wearing some fancy new thing or engaging in some kind of grandiose prattle about something they did. And you may just nod and say, , cool. That sounds fun. And they want you to, Ooh, and , Ooh, you had the front row ticket. Nobody could get those tickets. You not doing that turns you into less interesting supply. If you're fortunate, they may take their ridiculous conversations elsewhere. . this is again, where it gets a lot more difficult. Let's think about a difficult conversation. For example, they're gaslighting you or baiting you, , intellectually that if you get into the mud with them, it is going to escalate and just keep getting worse at those times. Cause you don't want that to keep happening. The best consequence is to disengage. Even when they escalate and say worse and worse things. . Remember what the reward for them is you losing it, you getting angry, you showing emotion. If you do that, you are in essence, giving them that honestly positive reward. And they're going to do it again. You may think that's ridiculous. How could my losing it be a reward? Because it goes back to what I just said. It lets them feel they're the ones who are put together and dominant. do not give it to them. what are. Other consequences for the narcissistic person that are meaningful. One is when they do what we call losing face, when they look bad socially, this isn't really about shaping their behavior, but just knowing that when they aren't the good one, the center of attention, the winner, then for a lot of narcissistic folks that can really unsettle them. Now, that's a very tough consequence for you to issue. Because they're not the one. Because it can just as easily backfire on you. If you're trying to paint them in a bad light to others, the best thing you can do is just let them be them. Because at some point they will lose face. It's inevitable with them that they'll behave badly. Sometimes us engaging with them doesn't let that natural process unfold. Let them be the ones who do it. Now another loss for them is a loss of success or attainment or looking back or their work not going the way they want. And again, there often isn't much you can do to make that happen in most cases as a consequence, but when it does, it's definitely a meaningful consequence for them. For example, let's say they mismanage money at work or behave inappropriately at work and they get called out on it. They will typically go down the witch hunt rabbit hole or blame other people. But if there are real losses for them, loss of a professional title, a license, a reputation, a public image. Ooh, that is a very, very big loss. And again, there often isn't much you can do to make that happen in most cases as a consequence. just being able to make that happen is a very, very meaningful consequence for them. Again, it just may be a consequence you may not be able to generate. What's another big consequence for narcissistic folks? When they lose superficial stuff literal stuff, money, fancy house, that's a big loss, but also another consequence. And the interesting thing about this consequence is that it will happen. This consequence I'm about to talk about is about, will happen to every narcissistic person. We are all narcissists. We have a lot of narcissistic people. in the world if they live long enough which is getting old I actually think that narcissistic people don't really ever believe they will get older or that they'll ever die and getting old means bodies that don't work as wrinkles breasts that don't stay up erections that don't show up hair that falls out and at some point the fillers surgeons and all the rest of it can't make it go away and despite the narcissistic tech bro prattling about things you can eat and do to live to be a hundred and eighty years old at this point in time the loss of power that aging brings is the ultimate consequence that all narcissistic people will ultimately face and I know you're thinking dr. Romney that is not gratifying to hear I can't push fast forward on the clock no it's not because you may not want to wait that long you but that consequence is always out there dangling and there ain't no Botox in the world that's going to take it away now since most of you are not going to wait 60 years for the narcissistic person in your life to get really old and not look the way they want or be who they want the most meaningful consequence the consequence that all of these sub consequences have in common is when the narcissistic person loses supply and while you may not and should not you may not and should not adapter if you no longer hold on to this sometimes you'll come back to positive where you're a few years old again the phenomenon will start there sooner or later you'll have schools growing different bout adhere aging that's when you profit it's early 20's lose money talking about consequences that is a reward for you it's tough what's meaningful to narcissistic people what kinds of consequences matter to them some of them might be the same as you might say look I admiration you don't live for it and for many of us certainly none of us want to lose the things narcissistic people and us would have that everyone has that in common that idea of supply and that other people are supply and that your power in their life is that you are bringing supply stop doing it and see what happens thanks again