Hi everyone, today I've got a very special guest. It's Dr. Lara Hayes. She's a physician, and she has worked in the emergency department for years, and today she's going to be talking with us about how to manage burnout. And I love her approach because it's very science-informed, but it's also very body-aware. Dr. Lara Hayes has worked in the emergency department for decades, and she also teaches yoga, and she's the host of the podcast Lasting Impact Wellness. they've got a bunch of really great resources there. I'm really excited to hear what she has to say today about burnout, how we can heal that. And let's jump in. Let's go. Awesome. , thank you much, Lara, for joining us. I'm super excited to talk with you today about burnout and stress and everything. Thanks, Emma. I'm really happy to be here and talk with you too. . And I think your experience at the emergency department is really important. I think you're really good at talking about burnout and stress and everything. . And I think your experience at the emergency department as an emergency room physician is going to be informative because am I in understanding doctors and police probably have some of the highest rates of burnout out of all professions? Yes, that's correct. . , . Just to start out, what is burnout for those who are maybe unfamiliar with the term or how would you define burnout? What is it? good question. A lot of my understanding of burnout came from, of course, personal experience being in the emergency department, but also recognizing how my body and my mind were responding to these high stress situations. I actually started researching it and reading books about it, trying to really understand it more for myself, but then also when I was in a leadership role, kind of trying to understand it for my team as to try to help guide them. And, , burnout has been studied for decades. I'm, I'm sure this Emma, but they really started focusing on it back in the seventies and there was this main, I think his name was Freud and burger in the seventies. And he did a lot of his research on workplace burnout. And a lot of what we know about burnout has come from that research on occupational burnout specifically, but throughout recent years, maybe the last five to 10 years or people are starting to look at burnout in these other arenas. particularly parental or caregiver burnout, we're starting to see some research being done there. And I wouldn't be surprised if even more research comes out in different arenas since the pandemic, because that highlighted a lot of different types of stress for all of us essentially. But when you think about what burnout really represents, and that is if you think of the actual WHO definition, which they define it as a syndrome of chronic stress that hasn't been successfully managed. if you think of it just in a basic form that, then you can see how easily you could extrapolate it to a number of your life scenarios. to speak. that's kind of the definition of burnout that's accepted now, again, originally started with workplace, but I think as we talk about it more, a lot of people listening will think, Oh, , , I feel that too. And not necessarily at work, or maybe in my, in my personal life, too. it's really composed of these three main components. And the first is emotional exhaustion. I think of that as the feeling of, it's kind of kind of makes sense. It's just, you feel I'm spent, I am completely maxed out. my light is dim now that I can barely see it that kind of, I to use the term soul sucked, you feel you are something is just totally sucking your soul. That's that feeling of emotional burnout, you have nothing left to give. . And then the second part of it, their second component is this depersonalization. And I think of that really is just a disconnection, you're disengaged from what your main roles are your primary job is. Maybe you don't feel personally invested in what you're doing anymore, even though you once did. And this shows up a lot, at least for me, it did. But for a lot of people as just you're just going through the motions, you're checking the boxes that need to be checked. And maybe you're even just showing up for the paycheck, honestly. But it's an attitude of, , I'm just done with this place. And, , you start to see in teams who experienced this or groups or organizations, especially at the workplaces, they lose that kind of team player attitude where, , , you're not going to be in that position. It's going to be , , you're just gonna be in the same place I am now. I'm just doing this to make sure that I'm actually doing it the way. And then you're just , oh, , They're part of the team technically, but they don't really even want to be anymore. This is the component that I think any manager or boss would just not want to hear from his or her employees, that disengagement. then the third one is this reduced personal accomplishment. that feeling that no matter what you do, you are not affecting any change. you're busting your butt, but you feel nothing's changing, nothing's improving. I used to use the term when I was during COVID and in my leadership role, I would say to my husband, I feel I'm just banging my head against the wall. I'm saying the same stuff over and over again, and it feels nobody's listening. again, those are kind of the main three accepted components of burnout. emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and then that feeling of decreased personal accomplishment or effectiveness. , that's interesting. I'm already learning much. I'm really not an expert in burnout. I have my own theories and approaches. I'm not an expert in burnout. I'm not an expert in burnout. I'm not an expert in burnout. I'm not an expert in burnout. I'm not an expert in burnout. But as you talk about that, that makes a lot of sense. And that third one, I think there's a lot of overlap between trauma and depression and burnout. And that third one, where you start to feel , why try? What's the point? I keep putting effort in, and I'm not seeing any outcome. Or if you do see an outcome, maybe it doesn't even feel good. You have some big success, and you're , cool, whatever. And that closely overlaps with both nervous system hypoarousal. With trauma. And that feeling of depression, where you just can't get excited about anything anymore. , for sure. And I think, too, sometimes even noticing, again, that soul-sucking feeling of just the dread. That dread factor of having to get up and go do, again, in the context of work. But that dread factor of, oh, my God, I'm dreading going to work today. Even if years before, you really found a passion and a purpose. And what you were doing. Those are the little signals and the signs that, hey, maybe there's something here to look into or be aware of. It almost feels , that's not who I am. And why would I feel that way? I used to love doing what I did. . . Huh. Interesting. And I wasn't aware of the depersonalization aspect of it. Just going through the motions. I hadn't thought of that as a little bit of dissociation. A little bit of separation from your sense of self and your sense of purpose. And again, that's another. I see things a lot of times through trauma-informed lens. And that's, , trauma can be a form of chronic stress. It's just interesting to see this overlap with the chronic stress. that leads me to wonder about, , how does chronic stress cause this psychological state? I mean, it's a mind-body state. It really is. But, , what's going on in the body? What's the body aspect of this? Or how would you describe that? . , I think you're correct in saying it's a mind-body state. I mean, , the two are not. They can't be separated. There is no separation. There is no separation. It's not a thing. Exactly. Exactly. And also, I guess before I touch on that, , these components of burnout, they're kind of a continuum, ? You can have all three components. You can have more of one, less of the other. You might fluctuate between the three components. by no means is it a strict definition. It's really, , there's some great. There's a gray area there, but it's more of a general concept. But, , , your mind and body are in constant communication with one another. And I think how burnout shows up is really in the form of chronic stress, as the definition says. , chronic stress that has not been managed successfully. what does that look ? , , at the physiologic level, that looks your sympathetic drive that is on all the time. I know this part, but I'll review it for listeners. If it's helpful in this context. , , your body or mind senses a threat. And that is usually from one of your senses, your ears, your eyes, or anything around you. Your body senses this threat. It's happening automatically. And that could be anything from someone yelling at you to seeing a life or death situation in the emergency department or an email that says you have more work to do. ? Totally. Exactly. All of those could be a threat. Something that is triggering. A trigger from any context. And, , that gets processed through the amygdala, which is the part of your brain that processes emotion. And then the amygdala interprets what it's sensing and what's coming into it. And if it interprets it as a threat, then it's going to send signals to other parts of your brain, specifically the hypothalamus. And then the hypothalamus is going to start this cascade of neurotransmitters release that goes out through the autonomic nervous system. And then telling your body to start preparing itself. , , we're talking about the stress response, but we're talking about the adrenaline and cortisol. . And basically kicking it into action in order to protect you. And you get signals sent to the adrenal glands, which primarily in stress, when we talk about the stress response, we're talking about adrenaline and cortisol. . With adrenaline being kind of the first immediate hormone that is produced and starts making physiologic changes to your body. , speeding up your heart rate, constricting certain blood vessels while dilating others. really just preparing your body to do something. . . Preparing you for action to overcome that threat. And then once your body senses that threat is still present and is still there and you need to stay in this mode of action or doing something, that's when the cortisol release starts to happen, which again has all kinds of effects on your body. Similarly, in protection mode, but it's really designed to help you move, help you do something, help you stay in action. when we think about acute stress, we just talk about the stress response. We just take that picture of that process happening acutely. It's fine. It's doing what it's supposed to do. There's nothing wrong with that process. And I to tell people, , it can be helpful at times. That's what helps you get out of bed in the morning. It's what helps you put one foot in front of the other when you're a little frightened to do something or get out on stage or give a presentation or ask somebody on a first date. , it's that sympathetic drive that's pushing you, that acute stress. that's good and that's not bad for us. But it's when that cycle is not. Dampened down or it's not settled ever and it stays. Constantly running in the background pretty much at all times. That's what leads to chronic stress. And then that's what becomes detrimental to our physical bodies and all our mind as . And then that's where that burnout comes in. It's these, it's this chronic stress or this even low level heightened response, if you will, in the sympathetic system that never goes away. And. And when you are dealing with that, even if you're not realizing it, which a lot of us don't, that's when those components of burnout. Can start to become a little bit more obvious. And , for sure. And I think, , we can think about these formal definitions of burnout and. They're helpful for sure. But a lot of times in reality. Burnout and chronic stress are going to show up for people as changes in their mood. Irritability. Necessity. In Afterwards. They're gone. It's changing. It's developing. Oh, . . You're ,Wow. That is some exponents of chronic stress. And if you try to teach that, and then you might miss the point about , Oh, no. But when it starts to, it does, it does worsen. when you. It does, it does, it does worsen. It does. that as a sign of stress or burnout for me, but I was much more short-tempered, more emotionally labile. I would kind of snap at my kids a little bit more than I normally would and have a lot more guilt and shame around that too. And that shows up for a lot of people for sure. And then I think too, these self-sabotaging behaviors that we get into where we don't stop and realize what's going on, but maybe we go from drinking one glass of wine every couple of nights to having a glass of wine or two every night when we get home from work just to decompress or you're just craving different things or you're binging on things that taste good or feel good in the moment, but then they make your stomach hurt later, give you the runs in an hour, but you just, it's sort of you kind of ignore those things. But again, I bring that up to say that those can be your signs of burnout if you're starting to see those things. Totally. . One of the first things I noticed when I start to get stressed is I'm , I'm going to go to the bathroom and I'm going to go to the bathroom and I'm going to go to the bathroom and I'm going to go to the bathroom and I'm going to go to the bathroom. . I change my eating. And I just started learning about how the cortisol release actually triggers, correct me if I'm wrong here, I'm not a doctor, insulin. It triggers insulin. your body can mobilize blood sugar, which makes your blood sugar drop, which makes you crave more sugar, which makes you get on this rollercoaster of blood sugar, basically. Is that ? , that's basically . And that's why, , these chronic states of high cortisol can lead to weight gain, diabetes, exactly metabolic syndrome. And it's interesting. This is kind of a side comment, but when you think about people who work night shifts or parents who are up all night with their kids, their little kids, and then your sleep gets all messed up and your cortisol levels are fluctuating in a very different way than if you're on a normal day night schedule. then you start to realize , wow, why am I , I'm hungry all day. I just want to eat all day, just to get a little bit of energy or something. , exactly. And you start craving different things and you're wanting sugar and more sugar. And that's when, , people start to see a little bit more belly bloat or they might put on weight. And , , again, as just an aside, and I saw that in myself when I was, when I was in different phases of my career where I was working more night shifts, for example, or again, having little babies where I was up most of the night and messing that up. I know. , sounds exhausting. I mean, I'm just tired, just managing my kids, but I don't work nights. And I think, , the other thing, I just find all this stuff really interesting, but the circadian rhythm has a direct interaction with your cortisol level. there's this cortisol awakening response that comes usually in the mornings, but if you're working night shift, it's going to be five, your body's just boink, boink, boink, all over the place. Exactly. It just adds another additional component to all of this. Yes. Seriously, seriously. , , . people who are experiencing burnout, they're going to see a lot of stuff going on in their bodies and you just described , , more liability, more irritability, maybe more cravings, maybe more unhealthy coping strategies. And I would imagine also people feeling tired, emotionally tired or physically tired or having a hard time sleeping or sleeping too much. I mean just a lot of these physical symptoms, ? , for sure. , and I think the sleep thing comes in a lot too, where, , a lot of people, they struggle with, they lie down at night to go to sleep and that's when the racing thoughts and the mind starts to work. And for a lot of us, that's because that is the first time all day that you have stopped. That physical activity has ceased for the day. You're not managing physically the things around you and you're finally lying there. Your body is still, but your mind is now your mind. I think I describe it a little hamster on a wheel. It's , as soon as you lie down, the hamster wakes up, perks up, its little ears perk up and it's , I'm ready to run. And it just runs over and over again on that wheel. And there's a lot to be learned from that. And that definitely happens with chronic stress and burnout where you are physically and emotionally exhausted, but then you lie down to go to sleep at night and you can't sleep because your mind won't stop. It won't rest. And, , and in that lies the practice of being more mindful during the day or making time to pause, take those moments where you can actually give your body some physical rest, let your emotions settle down, sit with your mind, let your mind, let that little hamster run just a little bit that when you keep piling up. Exactly. It's not just saving it all up for later. . , and I think I'm really interested to talk more about this. I think as we look at our body, sometimes we think, , I've got to kind of go to war against my body because my body's all stressed out at night and that's bad. And I need to make a change. And I'm , , I'm going to run. I need to make my body be quiet. And it's , actually, if you look at this, the reason you described that hamster turns on, our body and our mind have a natural ability and desire to resolve stress. we're built to get that sympathetic activation, and then to relax. We have a parasympathetic response. But if we stay in the alert or activated state all day, all day, all day, our body is just trying to the, , can I turn on that? , let's process Let's process these thoughts. Let's process these body chemicals. And it's , nope, I'm staying busy, busy, busy, busy, busy. , I'm laying down and your body is , , I guess now's the time. I guess now's my chance to process through these emotions and turn on that response. But first we have to process through them. . And that's the key. And , and the people who are listening and they're thinking, , I actually fall asleep pretty . But then I wake up at two in the morning and that's when my hamster starts. That's me. I can fall asleep great, but three to five, that's tricky time for me. . And , sleep is very nuanced conversation, but that for a lot of people that is part of it. It's, they're not completing the stress cycle before they're lying down to go to bed. And I don't know if you, if you've read the book Burnout, there's one of many, but it's by the Nagoski twins and they're, I may even be butchering their name. It's Emily Nagoski and her twin sister. I can't think of her name now, but the book's called Burnout. It's a great book and I highly recommend it. But they talk through this concept of completing the stress cycle and how, as you just mentioned, just because your body's tired and it's a certain time at night where , you're ready to go to bed physically, it doesn't mean that your insides have completed that stress cycle. And how do you do that? , it's hard, , it's hard to do that. But I think some of the things we mentioned of being more mindful, taking pauses throughout your day, doing some check-ins with yourself, taking inventory. And I'm happy to talk a little more on that. That's kind of my little golden tool. But then also having ways to complete the cycle. you get home from work and you maybe engage in some physical activity. You get some of that, you kind of let that sympathetic drive finish out. You have some release for it. Maybe you go for a walk or you get outside in nature or you come home and you hug your partner or you hug your kids. Or you call someone and you have an emotional or social connection with someone. Those are things that can kind of trigger the parasympathetic to start turning on and telling your body, , I'm in a safe place. I'm home and I can start settling down. And , sympathetic drive, you can start to turn off now. Totally. . And then certainly breathing and things that, that we can talk more about. Ooh, I love it. I love it. And one of the things I want to highlight for the listeners is I think a lot of people think when they think of chronic stress, they think I need a vacation. That's what they think they need. And while vacations can be helpful and getting a perspective can be helpful. You laughed a little bit. I want to hear what you have to say before I say my part. Go for it. No, I was just thinking I would never turn down a vacation, but of course, I mean, that's it's sort of, I mean, if you're not processing or managing the. . The stressors, then the stress can be mitigated a little bit, but it's not going to go away. I mean, that's, , when you think about the stressors versus the stress, the thing that's stressing you out versus the response in your body that you're having to it, going on vacation can make the stressors go away for a little bit, but that stress is still working through you. And most of the time when we go on vacation, when we come back, you maybe can gain some different perspectives and think there's some, if you do vacation , , and you've practiced some of these other coping mechanisms, then great. You may come back and have a different mindset, but that's why I laughed because I thought, oh, vacation never turned it down, but it does not solve. It does not solve all that's for sure. . That's and that's the thing that's really important. if I were to, if I were to think about this, . It's what I love about what I hear you describing is you're talking about a sustainable approach to managing the stress response in your body day to day, moment to moment. . Because people think of a vacation. It's , , what I'm going to do is I'm going to be stressed out and tight for the next four months. And then I'm going to take two weeks off. And then I'm going to be stressed out and tight for the next four months. And it's , if we were, if we looked at physical health that way, that'd be , I'm going to sit on the couch and eat potato chips for four months, and then I'm going to go to the gym for two weeks. And then I'm going to sit on the couch and eat potato chips for four months. And then I'm going to go to the gym for two weeks. And they're , why aren't I healthy? I do 600 workouts in two weeks. Exactly. , that's just not how it works. when I imagine chronic stress and burnout, I think of someone being in the, , I'm visualizing, , if you're in this, , safety state, and you're in this parasympathetic state, and then you get activated during the day, and you just stay activated, activated, activated all day, and then you go home, and it's this cliff, and you're not really, , processing through, then you're just kind of doing this cliff thing where you're stuck in the activated state all the time. And it sounds what you're describing is , , let's practice regulation throughout the day, nervous system regulation throughout the day to manage chronic stress instead of, , escape. . , the other thing, too, is, , chronic stress doesn't have to be a major life stressor. Of course, those happen. People lose their jobs, they get divorced, people die, tragedies happen, you get sick, your kids get sick, all of these things that seem obvious. But the majority of us dealing with chronic stress, it's more indolent than that. It's those hidden stressors. It's the nervous system regulation throughout the day to manage chronic stress instead of, , escape. It's the never-ending to-do list. It's the mental load that we bring to bed with us every single night. It's, , managing maybe a sick family member or getting older and realizing that now you have to start worrying about your parents as your kids. It's all of these little things that we feel we're managing . And maybe we are to some degree, but I think that's where you have to just be a little cautious of saying, , I feel I'm managing it , but I'm not. And I think that's where you have to just be a little cautious of saying, , I have to have a big, quiet celebration for them when we're going. I've had a just psych Nicole experience, , really less every day. let's just be a little cautious of , , let's get this together to see what it feels to be in charge of something that we need to take sinon, because it's already much easier to do a listing of what we create hotel remainedgef ile and all the Republican aldermen from the area. there's thoughts , with alleys held out in a real school structure, , and the combination of being self-confident in your own space, whether it's at a big, solitary or VideoBot, or with somebody that's actually in a postpartum depression. And again, that starts with , isn't my big Lego project? Or even a lot of school projects. us people, , this is what it feels pot , again, kind of recognizing it. And to me, that all starts with being a little more self-aware and valuing yourself enough to say, I'm going to get to know me and I need to be able to start to recognize my own triggers. I need to recognize my own body's warning signs and signals that it's sending me. And then you can start to take on some of these practices on how do you get, you said, how do you get down from this high that you've had in your nervous system, , all day or all week or all month or all year. how would you describe that? if we were talking about it, and I wish we had hours and hours to talk about this, but if you were to coach someone, an emergency physician, or someone who just has a stressful job, or a mom whose kids are always needing her and she's afraid they're going to get run over in the street in front of her. And they're , you're constantly , I got to make dinner and I got to do all these things. And it just feels this chronic stress. How would you coach them? , what would you, what would be the steps you'd encourage them to do with practical actions? You would encourage them to take day-to-day moment to moment to help manage that chronic stress? . good question. I think the first thing is recognizing that this is not something wrong with you. It's not a problem. It's not, it's not something that's awful. It's not something that's going to help you. It's, I mean, especially when we think about burnout, , there's some personal component to that, but a lot of burnout really stems from systematic issues and systemic, systemic issues, I should say, but, , issues within the workplace issues with all of the, again, mental load stuff that you're managing and dealing with throughout the day. I would say that's first is recognizing, look, there's not something wrong with you, but let's figure out how to help you get through this. And again, I think that's the first thing that I would encourage them to do is to recognize that you're not alone too. I think it can feel really isolating, especially when you're going through chronic stress. You, you can consciously acknowledge that other people deal with stuff, but it's really hard to see beyond your own stuff when you're really in the thick of things, especially when you're in that really in a state of burnout, you really do feel very isolated and alone. . , and then, I think for coaching somebody or advising someone and what I would tell my partners is to recognize and remind yourself that there are things that you can control. When you get to this point of chronic stress or burnout, you may feel you have lost control of everything. And as humans, we to be in control. And reminding ourselves, what can we control? We can control our breath. We can stop, take a pause and we can use our breath to our advantage. We can control our movement. We can choose to move our bodies. We can choose to incorporate functional fitness or physical activity into our day. We can choose. . And that's what we put into our body and into our mind. sometimes it doesn't feel that way, but we can control what we're saying to ourselves, our negative self-talk, all of that stuff, our mindset. And I, first and foremost, you have the ability to just pause and then choose your response to any situation. And that's really where that mind body connection comes in and this mindfulness work. And, , again, it's for me, it's probably just starts with taking a pause. I have this, we have this podcast episode that we did on our podcast. It's a, I think it's in our self-awareness episode where I tell the listeners to stop for 30 seconds, no matter what they're doing, even if they're driving, just keep driving, but just stop for 30 seconds and just breathe and just notice what comes up in your body. , that's a typical mindfulness practice, but, and that's a great place to start. And if you have a hard time just sitting with yourself for 30 seconds, that's . It's not a problem. It's not a problem. It's not a problem. It's not a problem. It's not bad, but that's probably a sign that you might benefit from doing that a little bit more often. , and I, I think that's a great place to start is just stopping, pausing, taking a breath. And then from there you can increase that 30 seconds to a minute or five minutes. And , these breathing practices don't have to look formal meditation or, , , they don't have to happen at a certain time of day. It, it just gives you a moment to stop and then tap into your body and what your mind's doing at that time and, and start building that connection that you can, , you can manipulate it to your advantage. These things happen automatically, we discussed earlier, but you can influence them for sure by things breathing and movement. Absolutely. Absolutely. And it, it makes, , if you look at the kind of the allostatic load, basically the total amount of stress that someone carries the whole day, if instead they go and they get a little activated, something stressful at work, and then they breathe and they slide, slow down. . And then you can, , if you're in a really, really, really, really slow down, then they're down here for a little bit and then they maybe climb back up and breathe and slow down and they're down here. But you look at the, this, some amount of stress under that chart, I'm imagining this line graph here in my head. There's a lot lower, less minutes stressed during the day. your body is less stressed out and it gets a chance to process or gets a chance to move some of that cortisol out of your system. . . And it's a practice. , I mean, you wouldn't go out and expect to hit a home run at the World Series if you've never swung a bat in your life. , and as humans, we tend to be harsh on ourselves. And if we don't get it the first time, we think we're a failure. But this is where some grace and self-compassion can come in as . But practicing these things takes time. And the more you practice, the more you'll really reap the benefits and start to feel different. I mean, these things work. There is some scientific basis behind breathing and deep breathing and doing some parasympathetic stimulation. And I mean, that's real stuff. You just have to allow yourself the time and space to do it. , for sure. For sure. I'm absolutely positive of that. And our parasympathetic response can be strengthened. our ability to get activated can get strengthened, especially if we get stressed out all the time. We get really good at getting stressed out. But the more you practice that parasympathetic response, the stronger that parasympathetic muscle basically. It can activate that vagal tone. , for sure. I mean, for me, when I think about when I'm the most, when I feel that real rush of adrenaline, particularly at work, if I have somebody coming in and it's a really difficult case and I'm aware of it, I've heard the medic radio chime in and I said, let's say it's a pediatric cardiac arrest, something that's really stressful. Then I know as I'm prepping the room and my team's coming in and we've got all the necessary people there, I can feel it's a natural response, we said. My body, my insides start to rev up. My heart rate goes up. I get goosebumps. I get a little gurgle in my stomach and I start breathing a little faster. But I have learned that I have to control that. I have learned that throughout my career, because if I can't control that in that moment, if I can't call upon the tools that I've practiced that I can use to slow it down, then I'm not going to be effective. I won't be able to communicate with my team and I ultimately won't do the thing for that patient. just to the point of practice. I practice my breathing. I practice my mindfulness. As , I'm a yoga instructor, that's been a big part of what has helped me get through those stressful times. That's an extreme example, but I can tell you that I've practiced long enough now. I don't get it perfect every time, but I've practiced it long enough now where I can abort it pretty much immediately. But then I have to let it go somewhere after. That's that finishing that stress cycle we talked about. It needs to be an outlet for it later, but I can control my breath at that time to bring myself down, which is great. . I really appreciate you sharing that. And I think of myself as a mother and seeing situations that. And it's , wow, my heart is sensitive too as a mom that it's hard to manage those emotions. Would you consider your response as you described doing that? I'm just curious. Would you describe that as kind of white knuckling it? Or gritting your way through it? Or would you describe that as regulating your way through it? Or is it a little bit of both within the situation? Truly, I think it's regulating. But again, I think that takes time and it's a learned response. Probably in the beginning, it was more white knuckling and trying to get through it and just trying to tell yourself, just be focused, just be focused. compartmentalize. Put that in a box and put it into the storeroom with more boxes. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. And over time, I think it is more self-regulating. And again, it just comes with practice. Now, there's definitely still some compartmentalizing that goes on because there's a lot of emotion that comes with those types of cases, of course. But I think that speaks, again, as I said it out loud, I think, , that really speaks to the practice of it because it changes over a career, over years of having to be in that situation. And, , it seems very more regulated to me now than it does to be just a grin and bear it type of reaction. . More of a controlled response, if that makes sense, as opposed to a reaction. I really appreciate you taking , , exploring that because I think there are a lot of people who can get through stressful situations, but not in a sustainable way. And what you're describing is a sustainable approach to regulating your body in the middle of a stressful situation. You're not escaping the situation and you're not avoiding it in your mind. You're not just stuffing and suppressing those emotions. You're regulating through those emotions. And of course, with these big situations, you've got to unpack them sometimes later. You've got to do refilm and work through them and process them, I'm sure. That's really cool. Really, really appreciate that. Do you have any other tips or suggestions on how people. the first thing I noticed. You said you got to be aware. You got to stop distracting yourself and being busy all the time. You got to be aware of what's going on in your body. Second thing would be take a breath, be mindful, be present. Anything else you'd recommend to help turn on that parasympathetic state or that sense of calm? . for that specifically, some things that we talked about already, but that emotional connection. , , hugging people, hugging you, especially if you're a parent. , sometimes that. I tell my daughters, sometimes when I hug them, I'll just say out loud to them, this is the best feeling I've had all day. Because it just, it really, , it does something. It creates hormonal shifts within your body and it really fills you up. And it can, it really does activate that parasympathetic. , , finding an emotional connection or social interaction. Certainly, as we mentioned, physical movements. The other thing that I do that's kind of a simple practice that I recommend to people, and people can try it or not. It's. I used the term earlier, take inventory. I'm glad we could kind of come back to that. it's something that my husband and I practiced that we got into over, again, the last few years when we started recognizing, hey, we're feeling a bit burned out or a lot burned out. And how can we start, how can we start gaining control over our lives again and over what's going on in our world, in our place, in the world around us? And we use this term, take inventory, and it's really just taking a moment to assess, , your short-term situation, your kind of midterm situation, and your long-term. what I mean by that is, , take a moment throughout your day where you short-term, , how does my body feel now? And that's that mindfulness piece. It's sitting, pausing for 30 seconds and saying, how do I feel? , are my shoulders up to my ears? , if they are, can I just pull me too? Can I just pull them down a little bit, ? Or exactly, , or if I'm super slouchy, sit up tall. Let's, , let's just, and again, without judgment, it's just, let's just see what's going on physically. And then in that moment, you can start being more mindful and a little more present. And then you move into that sort of midterm inventory, which is, , now that I'm here, now that I'm present for this moment, I've checked in, , what's stressing me out now? What's, and it's not about adding more tasks or running through your to-do list. It's, all , what am I feeling now? If I'm feeling stressed, , what's caught? What's the primary cause of that now? Or what's, what's currently sucking my soul? What's the thing? And then the longer term is, , now what do I need to do to deal with that? , what do I really want? And what small changes can I start making now that are going to have the greatest impact? And, and I say it sort of flippantly is this sort of taking inventory, but it's really just about stopping, pausing, noticing how you feel, noticing what's showing up for you, and then doing a check-in. . What's stressing? What's stressing me out? What's sucking my soul? All . Now that I've identified that, what are some steps I need to take to just make this a little more manageable? How can I engineer my life a little bit differently today that it's more manageable? And, , a lot of people listening and I talk to, I talk to patients all the time about all kinds of things and people and friends and myself, I'm sure have been guilty of thinking or saying this. They feel , , I don't have a few minutes to pause. I'm freaking busy that I do not have that time. And to that, I say, we all can take a pause. , we all can take a pause. , I don't, I don't accept that answer. I don't accept it for myself. I just, , even in those moments, and again, I talk about this in one of the podcast episodes about this, these stressful moments of being in the ED, you can always take five or 10 seconds to pause. You can take five or 10 seconds to get yourself together, to take a breath, to check in and to decide and choose your next move and do it when you're in the bathroom. The bathroom is probably the one place of solace that we all can find in our busy day. Now, as a parent, we all know sometimes you cannot even get to the bathroom without being disturbed. However, it sort of is the one place though, where if you even lock the door, people kind of understand, oh, all , , she's in, she's going to the bathroom, , and they just give you five or 10 minutes. instead of bringing your phone to the bathroom, which is what the majority of us do, , you're , oh, I got five minutes. I'm going to go to the bathroom. I'm going to check my email. I'm going to look on social media. You're, you're in that autopilot mode, but next time, , next time, maybe don't. Do that. And while you're sitting on the toilet or even after when you're washing your hands, look in the mirror and just take a moment to just take inventory a minute, two minutes, , and you'll start, you feel different when you do it. It's just getting yourself to get into that habit and that practice of, of doing these things. . . I really that. I can see how that could be applied in many levels. as a mom, I think about some of the, the area I've been kind of working on now with my family is the car. when we're in the car, I've got. Poor kids. There is often messes and fighting and yelling and people can't get their seatbelts on and other people are clicking their seatbelts and I'm , , stop it. And I just my initial reaction is to yell or do something because I'm driving and I can't get my hands on them. And if I were to think of your inventory, it'd be , , in the moment I'm going to slow myself down. It's not an emergency. I can breathe. And then in the midterm, I'd be , , we're going to stop the car until everyone has their seatbelt. Done. Or until you guys stop hitting each other or until we solve this problem amicably. And then the longterm, this is the area that I haven't quite gotten to, but it's the next thing on my list is , , we're going to have family evenings where we sit and talk about car rules and we're going to educate the kids and we're going to print up car rules and tape them on the seats. And every time, we're going to do a star chart and we're going to, creating a system to prevent the longterm problems that we're having. And I , I, I. I this idea of taking an inventory, short term. I can't make a new rules list for the car. I've just got to breathe. Exactly. Exactly. Midterm. We've got to get to where we're getting. Can we do it calmly and longterm? Can we make a system that's going to be sustainable for our family to drive? That's perfect. , exactly. I that. I that a lot. That's really helpful. that's really cool. I'm sure I can relate to your example too, for sure. The chaos, the constant chaos. The trying to herd cats, which is moving your children and trying to get them to do anything. . . My four year olds line lately is I'm too tired to buckle myself. No, just, just do it. you can do it. Oh, that's awesome. That's funny. . , awesome. , thank you. Thank you much. , I'm , it's interesting to hear your experiences and to learn from you. And I feel you have much, much good stuff to share. thank you. Thank you much for taking the time. Out of your busy schedule to be here today and share that with my audience. Really appreciate it. Thank you. This was great. I was telling you before we started recording, I think that I love these types of connections and, , just getting to meet and talk to all kinds of people. And it's awesome. . Love it. Good for your wellbeing, social connection. We're doing it now. . Perfect practice. Totally. Totally. . And then just tell everyone where they can find you and a little bit about, , your, your community or your course resources options, what people can do to. Find more about what you do. . Thank you for that opportunity. first and foremost, we have our own podcast. It's called lasting impact wellness, and it's available on Spotify and apple and, , through our website as . And our website is lasting impact wellness.com. And my husband and I, , we have a health coaching and consulting company where we meet with organizations about how to improve their wellbeing from leadership all the way through. And, , we're really excited about. The work that we do there and you can go on the website and learn more about that. And a lot of the things that we talked about today in a little more detail, we have some podcast episodes about that stuff too. , , but , and we're always, always, always, always excited to talk to new people. you can email us at info at lasting impact wellness.com and we will certainly respond. thanks again. . This was great, Emma. Thank you. Cool. . Really appreciate you being here. , . . , we'll talk to you again some other time. I hope. . That'd be great. Cool. Thanks all. Chelsea? Thank you much. Now we can go and writeformeonaj Violence n todo. We got a follow up on things that have been said about COVID-19 with our gives and opinos PAWSbamk. here it goes again. , thank you for hosting. Thank you for listening andbread Retreat is brought to you by Community resources doti. We have inclusive technology that allows hauling research that will deliver resources to your agency without paying for legal assistance. This is where our mental health care and health insurance providers, long-term care, mental health programs are ruled out, and physical health care, mental health care.