when you set a boundary, the woman that didn't want her three-year-old having ice cream, please don't give ice cream to her toddler, it's giving her a tummy ache. The emotional immature person, they don't hear this very reasonable request. They hear, I am bad, you're a terrible grandma, I don't want to see you anymore. They hear something completely different, which then makes them feel rejected. And they're going to fight you. That's where they're going to give you that sassy, snarky comment coming out of left field. They might just storm out, or they might just stonewall you and shut down. And then they move into defense mode. And this defense system is top-notch. And all this stuff is happening in just milliseconds. It's happening fast. And the defense system is blame-shifting, you're too sensitive, you're controlling. It's story-twisting, where they make you this big, bad villain, and they're this victim. you're , you attacked me. She screamed at me. It's , no, I just asked you really kindly to feed the cookies instead of the ice cream. Or they do martyrdom, where it's , after everything I've done for you. Hello, everyone. Today, we're going to be talking about how to set boundaries with emotionally immature people. These are people who, when you try to set a boundary with them, they respond by attacking you, blaming you, blowing up, crying, taking things personally. And I'm bringing on a special guest. It's an expert on boundaries. Her name is Jess Miller. She's a licensed marriage and family therapist, and she's the creator of Mind Your Boundaries. And she's going to teach us her clear system on how to work with setting boundaries with emotionally immature people. It's awesome. And I'm really excited to be talking about this. let's jump in. All , Jess, thank you. Thank you much for being here. I'm happy to have you on the show again. Oh, it's an honor. I had much fun last time. Thanks for having me. . . today we are going to be talking about setting boundaries with emotionally immature people. Yes. Can you tell us, let's just start off , what do they have in common? Who are these people? What do you notice about them? , as we were getting, on Instagram, we get questions submitted by people just having problems in family dynamics. And very quickly, we were starting to see a pattern where someone would just set a very reasonable boundary. , just give us a heads up before you come over. Don't feed our toddler lactose. She's lactose intolerant. Just very simple things. And then they would be getting these big dramatic reactions. And I'm , what the heck? not only did we see a pattern of a reasonable limit, and then they were taking it as a personal attack. We started to see that these people had very similar characteristics. they were all about me. a husband would say, we're going to go to my wife's for Christmas. Even though we've been to your house, , for the last 10 years, we're just going to kind of even it out a little bit. Oh my gosh, what about me? , why would you do this to me? They're also very allergic to accountability. no matter how you try to explain, , this is how you hurt me. It's just a hot potato. They just bat it back at you really, really quickly. And then the last thing is they truly feel injured either by reacting really big or being very, very hypersensitive. They feel injured. . And take your boundary a personal attack. they'll be , what? You don't love me or you don't care about me or I'm not important to you. Or they'll bounce it back. You'll be , you are the most selfish person or you're whatever. . Yes. you're too controlling. You're too sensitive. . Shows a lot of really low personal insight. they're not really self-aware and able to think about multiple parts of the situation at once. I, for the longest time, cause I've been in practice. For a handful of years, a dozen years. And when people clients would talk about family members responding in very immature ways, or even just people in my own life, when they would respond in immature ways, I always resorted back to , it seems you're, you're acting a teenager. this is ridiculous. But then I started digging into the research from Dr. Lindsay Gibson, the author of adult children of emotionally immature parents. And it explains it way better where she's , no. We're not dealing with teenagers. We're dealing with people that are stunted. It's they have the same skill set as a toddler. And that's where it really started clicking for me. Cause I'm , they have no insight. They have no ability to actually put themselves in your shoes and imagine what they're doing to you. It is literally you're telling your toddler, no, or trying to take their little toy away. And they just don't understand. . I have a two and a half year old now. And the other day she was grabbing her sister's book. I'm . I'm tearing it. And her sister was , no, no, it's a library book. don't tear it. And I came over and tried to intervene and the toddler bit my five year old. , cause she's just , I don't get it. I have no reason. And then she's throwing herself on the floor and crying. Cause she just, she wanted what she wanted and she has very, very, very little awareness of what other people around her want or need or feel. . And that's where it makes much sense. Because. The interactions are just your two and a half year old. They're impulsive and dramatic and they just come out of left field. You're just , what is going on? stop fighting your sister. , . . How do, how do adults end up being emotionally immature? What fuels that? , there's lots of theories. far what they're saying is inconsistent attachment as they're growing up. , just what's it going on in their environment? Genetics. but then also trauma plays a big role in it as . . And I would assume people who grew up in a home where you don't talk about emotions, emotions are generally punished. They just simply never learn any skills around working with feelings and having them and thinking about them carefully. , . But I think it's important because there is many conversations around cutting people off and estrangement. And when I'm just asking this question, in no means am I trying to excuse the harmful behavior that emotionally immature people do. I simply believe it's important that we understand their limitations that we can adjust our expectations because we really do suffer more by assuming they have these emotional tools and they're choosing not to use them. , . , I just believe that we suffer way more by just assuming that they're choosing not to, out of malice or stubborn, or just , , they're just being selfish. And I think if we adjust it and we actually are , no, maybe they can't. maybe they truly have a rest of development that really helps everybody in the system. , . I had a family member who I did, I assumed that every time she was giving me advice or correcting me or telling me to just be more positive, I thought she just really disliked me and was very critical and judgmental of me, which I mean, there maybe was a part of that. But as I tried to explain to her this idea of toxic positivity, I tried to explain to her this idea of, oh, if, when I express this, I'm just seeking to kind of share an emotion for a minute. And she was , basically , , why would you do that? just being positive is the only way to do things. And I was , oh, , you literally, this concept was literally whoosh. , just couldn't connect the dots. , she just literally could not connect. The dots. I, my assumption was she's being mean because she knows she should be a little bit empathetic. And instead she's just telling me I should shut up and get over it. And she never used those terms, but that's what she was implying. And I was assuming she thinks I'm a bad person. In reality is she only has one skill and that's her skill. It's just great if you can get through it. And when I understood she just doesn't have the context to understand this idea of empathy, she's not empathetic, but it's this idea of if someone expresses a negative emotion, I'm feeling sad today. If you say , oh, that sounds hard. What's going on? That's a little bit more dynamic of a skill than saying, , you should just look for the bright side. Goodbye. , stop feeling that way. Stop feeling that way. , stop feeling that way. That literally something she would say. , and I think what you're saying is she may have lacked that skill of mentalizing, being aware of her own internal world and her own internal experience, but also being able to dip into, man, if that was happening to me, I would feel sad too and then relate to you on an emotional level. And I think that's what we're getting at. I don't think they have that skill at all at all. . -. . , first, the first thing we do is we gain some understanding and we adjust our expectations, ? It's maybe not that they're being malicious. They're not necessarily trying to be awful or manipulative, but they perhaps just don't have the capacity now to manage their big feelings. And yes, I have an empathetic. Point of view. Yes. Yes. . then what do we do? How does adjusting expectations help us? Does that mean we just do it once you real , especially when you're trying to because I think we're a lot of people I find that are reaching out for help or just clients or even our own personal experience. We get stuck waiting for them to take accountability waiting for them to and really what you're waiting for is emotional growth and that's not going to happen. you're really allowing. At that moment when you're waiting for somebody that is emotionally immature, you are saying I am essentially allowing that three-year-old that lives inside their emotional brain to control my emotional healing. And no one's going to do that. You would never allow your two and a half year old to be in charge of your emotional internal world. Would ? I mean not I mean it does happen sometimes but you shouldn't be logically really. , you wouldn't choose that. . . You wouldn't say you're in charge of when I get to be happy again, or you're in charge of letting me know when I get to be at peace again. once you acknowledge that then you set appropriate boundaries. if somebody makes you feel a certain way and , , I'm not going to get that acknowledgement. They're never going to fully be able to put themselves in my shoes and say they're sorry and take accountability. Then you have to figure out. , I have to figure out how to heal on my own. And then when I go forward with this person, now I have different boundaries to protect to make sure she doesn't do that to me again. it's really just acknowledging their limitations as maybe it's a not an unwillingness, but maybe it's a I can't change and then adjusting your expectations and then setting boundaries if it's safe to do . . . It makes me think about our son before he was diagnosed with ADHD. We had rules for both of our kids. They're very similar in age and but our son would always get into trouble the same thing and my husband at night. Sometimes you just be I really worry that eventually he's going to be 24 and he's going to come back to us and say hey dad, all the times I got in trouble when I was little I truly couldn't help it and it that were that's what always it reminds me of that where it's once we realized. Oh, he can't help it and we changed our expectations adjusted the rules. It just made our whole house run smoother. We didn't have this resentment this frustration with him. It was different and he obviously suffered a lot less and I believe that you could use that in this situation as . Just working with the emotionally immature people in our life. That's interesting. Do you think that this is partly a generational issue? our parents and our in-laws they literally never had conversations around emotions and now Millennials and on we're all trying therapy or listening to therapy podcasts or reading books children of emotionally immature parents, ? we all have this language and this mindset around emotional growth and we expect that other people would be doing that too. And the other generation is , huh? I don't even have a framework to talk about that. , . And that's what I'm saying is I think that we're assuming we're looking at a 60 year old and they're going to have the same emotional tools that we have. They just have to build them up. And I am just asking the question. What if they're they truly don't have access to those tools and it's causing a lot more suffering than necessary. I'm not saying going no contact or estrangement isn't necessary in certain cases. we'll get to that in the discussion because even once you understand their limitations, you change your expectations and then you set healthy boundaries, which you control and you enforce you still have to decide is this relationship sustainable or not because some people are . Unhealthy that it is not sustainable. And I think we cannot imagine that if we're being super critical and rigid with other people that we are being the righteous ones and they're being the evil ones. We also have to develop a sense of compassion towards what may be different about them that we don't . . and acceptance. Yes, acceptance. . what's it for an EIP emotionally immature person when you set a boundary with them? why do they react? big? , I am I'm a freak about understanding people and it's crazy when you hear these stories about , , I set a boundary and then they did this. I don't really even have to read their reaction. I swear the pattern is the same. if anyone now listening has an emotionally immature person in their life, they are going to be , . And , they do that and then they do that. It's predictable almost every single time. when you set a boundary please call before you come over, , or the woman that didn't want her three-year-old having ice cream, please don't give ice cream to her toddler. It's giving her tummy ache. Anything that. The emotional immature person they don't hear this very reasonable request. They hear I am bad. You're a terrible grandma. I don't want to see you anymore. They hear something completely different which then makes them feel rejected. And it's if you imagine your boundary, is striking a match and you're just holding it. Once they start to hear the negativity, you're not enough or you're bad and they start to feel rejected. It's their brain just starts on fire. And now you have this surge of cortisol and adrenaline making it feel very uncomfortable for them. you need to take action and get away from this feeling away. And that moves them into this next phase of fight, fight or freeze. They really do feel a life threat is being detected. And they have to take some sort of action. And if you can just imagine you are in a room and it's on fire and the smoke is filling your lungs, it's burning your eyes it's just uncomfortable. That's how rejection feels to them. And they're going to fight you. That's where they're going to give you that sassy snarky comment coming out of left field. They're going to flee. , very defensive. They're going to flee. They might just storm out or they might just Stonewall you and shut down and then but that doesn't. They're going to pass for long and then they move into defense mode. And this defense system is top notch and all this stuff is happening in just milliseconds. It's happening fast. And the defense system is blame shifting you're too sensitive. You're controlling its story twisting where they make you this big bad villain and they're this victim. you attacked me. She screamed at me. It's no, I just asked you really kindly to feed the cookies instead of the ice cream and , or they do martyrdom where it's after everything I've done for you. After that, they finally escaped the fire. you just imagine they leave the house. They leave your presence. And the first thing they do is they're on the phone with family and friends. It's really good. Plus, , I just they're telling them their version, their distorted version of events, which is , I'm I need help and it's really not done. I don't believe this is done maliciously or consciously. I believe it's because they have such a fragile sense of self. They cannot self-soothe. You have to remember two and a half three years old. They need you to calm their little system down. they're they're getting their little minions. If you're imagining grew on despicable me and they're telling them this distorted version of events. , your family and friends are , how could you do this? then they will, even. If grew doesn't say go do this. They want to help. then the minions disperse and go to you and they're , how could you do that to mom? And you're just , what you're going to use? I didn't push her off my porch. We talk and that's that's kind of the cycle every time. -. It's it's a lot. And , I see it. It's easy to see it. It's easy to see it. it's really about this fear of rejection. This fear. Oh my gosh. . . , their deepest fear is , I'm not enough I'm not good enough. I'm just I'm just not enough. And then they whenever they sense rejection that is everything starts on fire. And the only thing , when you're trying to communicate with them in the midst of their brain being on fire, and they're just have the surge of adrenaline and cortisol. I just to explain to people it's as if you were in a room on fire. And you're trying to get out and it's really getting warm. it's getting closer to you. And again, the smoke is filling your lungs and your eyes and it's just terrible. And then somebody comes alongside you and says, hey, will you meditate with me for a second? you wouldn't be able to you're just what I got to get out of here. And that's how they feel. they don't actually hear you saying this is how you hurt me. They're just they're more consumed about the rejection feeling and getting away from you. . . crazy. It's crazy, but it makes sense. I mean, , I think one of our deepest core fears is not be good enough and being rejected. I know it shuts down your ability to think . It does. It does. And I again, I am not trying to explain their experience to minimize their damage. their behaviors are very damaging to people. I'm trying to help us understand it. That's why I'm not trying to excuse it though. I just want to make sure that's clear. For people. . . . but if we can understand them more clearly then that opens up some options for how to handle this situation more effectively. . Yes. . I have for years. I've always communicated with those in my life who are emotionally immature. I've communicated with them differently knowing that their deepest fear is that they're not good enough. And I've I've always focused on two things when I bring a boundary request or I bring something. To them that I know that it's not going to be fun for them to hear. I focused on attachment. attachment theory and I'm really trying to make them off the get-go. I'm trying to help them feel very secure in the conversation. I'm not leaving you're very valued. I'm really trying to root it in attachment and then throughout my script or throughout my talk. I'm really reassuring them you're just fine. I'm trying to keep their system calm and then I also focus on framing the boundary in a way. this is how it would benefit you because you have to remember one of their biggest characteristics is it's all about me. -. And if I can frame it this is how it would benefit you. They are I do get further where they're more opt to come and fall in line, which we know it doesn't matter a boundary. You have full control over either way. But as especially when you're parenting it sure is nice when they can come alongside you and just respect your parents. Parenting decisions and that has really helped me those two things for sure. Fascinating. , , . the two big things are making sure to reassure their attachment telling them you're important to me. I care about you. I want you in our life and I want this to be good. here's why I'd to set this boundary and the second one. What was it? I just forgot my brain fell out. Oh telling them what's in it. For them telling you what's in it for them. Because they're kind of a toddler and they need to know what's the what's the dessert at the end? Sorry. , no, it's totally fine. , that's exactly what it is. It's the same thing with when you want them to eat their broccoli. It's just oh my gosh, let's get this broccoli done and then you get to pick chocolate or strawberry ice cream or oh my gosh, let's get bath time done. then we can get our cozies on I can tickle scratch your legs while we read our book, , it's just the same thing. It's the exact same thing. I'm not trying to be disrespectful to a lot of people. The older generation. I'm just saying that it works better for me when I do it that way. I can't really just say do that. I try I put it in a framework to try to then teach it I can teach you that now. I just put it in an acronym the clear formula and it just helps people be able to replicate whichever situation they're in. They can just plug in that into this formula and have their own script to communicate with the emotionally immature person in their life. let's hear it. The clear formula. I love it. . with the clear formula again, we're just basing it in attachment and how the boundary will benefit them. see is I start off away communicating their value. this is why you're important to me. L is the limit or the boundary and this you want to keep super short and concise because you don't want to overwhelm their system or pop off those alarms. You just want to nervous. , we have a tendency to over explain over explain over explain and that might be overwhelming for someone whose brain is on fire. , . and you're trying to because basically I'll explain the acronym but then I'll tell you what I'm kind of doing. I communicate their value L is the limit or the boundary E is I'm explaining the benefit this is how it's going to benefit you trying to get them to buy in and at that point. That's when they're going to start to register a little bit of rejection or a little bit of something and that's when they usually give you that snarky comment oh, you're telling me I'm trying to make my granddaughter sick on purpose by giving her ice cream or something. Just I'm left field common. I have to make an appointment now to come see my son and it's no not at all and then a is you provide assurance to them again. Just rooting and attachment and ours you repeat the boundary done. what this helps me do when I go to communicate my limits with emotionally immature people in my life is it helps me focus just on my script what I can control which is just keeping calm throughout the whole thing. which is just keeping calm throughout the whole thing. And then minding my boundary afterwards. And then minding my boundary afterwards. But what I used to do. Is I used to go into these conversations with the goal of I just don't want to make someone cry. I just want to make them upset. I don't want them to be mad at me. And I had no control over that. I would go in super shaky plus you just know that big emotional dramatic reaction is going to come your way and framing it this way for me. And I had no control over that. I would go in super shaky plus you just know that big emotional dramatic reaction is going to come your way and framing it this way for me. It really keeps me calm and focused. And because I'm approaching them in a way that I truly believe helps keep them calmer. I get further in the conversation and sometimes I get all the way through without popping off. . that's. And basically what you're trying to do if you imagine your child and you're trying to give them medicine you're making them feel safe everything's going to be fine it's just nothing's bad I'm making them feel very secure. And then you give them the medicine. And when they that's the boundary. And when they're just kind of registering oh my gosh this might not be a good thing, then away I'm giving them the sucker no everything's fine this is how it's going to benefit you. And then giving them reassurance again repeating the boundary, and you're out. . . Huh. , give us an example. , it's a great formula. I love it. I have I have a couple questions but I'd love to hear another example. . I think the biggest thing that people are going to do is they're going to be more open about their relationship with their child. . And the first thing that people are going to feel is this is overwhelming this is a lot of steps. And I really want you to imagine you're, you're mainly just saying a nice sentiment this is how much I value you in the beginning. Just quickly stating the boundary, and then just wrapping it in a way that it benefits them. And the rest is just reassurance, and then repeating your boundary it's really not a lot of work. we had a couple reach out, and they wanted to set a boundary with his mom who is emotionally dependent. And she was emotionally immature. No tech for their four year olds birthday gift. And it actually happened where she actually get got him a phone, but I did a podcast episode. It's insane. I did a podcast episode on this is how I would have set this boundary or communicated it with her. Had they reached out beforehand. And basically, I would have the, the son go over and just be hey mom our I would start it off , I just love how you and Benny are close. The first thing that I would do is I would say, Hey, I'm going to be your mom. And then get engaged, I want you to date for me and I will get you a great surprise on my birthday. But I know there's no such thing. It's simple, it's too fightable to even have a challenge. I love how you two guys did not as busy and half up to do my map tobild you and for you guys and participate of the kids board because as you, humans, for us, it's takes a lot of time, . Everything's on sort of that day, you guys, growth every day. Everything's a little bit awkward. But it's a really good use. Everything is, we did a conversation actually. Which was this lot. And in just 24 hours. just no that's not what I'm saying at all. I'm just saying he's growing up fast We want to just save her and kind of protect that bond you have with them again No tech no screens just we're focusing on books and puzzles. We'll see you at 10 o'clock Saturday morning done now The mom's gonna react because this mom used crying to control her son she gets really emotional and then he backs down that's their pattern, but in that moment she would start crying. She would just be I can't believe You're either telling me how to do this or you're giving me restrictions I feel I mean she's gonna throw a bunch of stuff at her son. in that moment I instructed him you need to focus on this actually has nothing to do with the boundary I just said this has nothing to do with not buying him a tablet This has something to do with the fact this is everything to do with the fact that my mom can't process emotions she can't process it and how I it Helps me when I get an emotional reaction in the moment is I just imagine I just picture they're younger three-year-old inside their head Controlling the gears this actually isn't the 60 year old I'm looking at this is just the three-year-old not being able to handle this , , . I love it. That's powerful That's really good, and it takes courage to do it's not necessarily easy But it's better than having your four-year-old have its own have his own iPhone Yes, yes in that scenario that she actually he did communicate the boundary But it's a request we she just said please no tech or whatever and he thought he she understood She came to the birthday party. She didn't get a tablet She got him an iPhone and then I just instructed them even if you get a gift I know I would have just had any in here is but even if you get a gift that though as a parent that the Beautiful thing about boundaries is you are in control a hundred percent of the time I just said in that moment I would have Allowed my kid to play with it and then when he goes to either be distracted with another toy or go down a nap time That's when as a husband and wife we go and talk to the mom and just say hey wow what a generous gift We're not ready to introduce tech yet we're either gonna put it up until he's a little bit older or you can take it and keep it until he's a little bit Older either way 21 , it's I'm in control the whole time , no, that's a great example It's a great example and that's how you mind your boundary because it's not a boundary if you just ask and ask You've got to also be willing to take an action at the end. Yes. It has to be something you can enforce , something in your control. . . , love it. , I love how your process Involves lots and lots of inviting people to come along with you inviting people to stay connected inviting people to listen and be comforted and be reasonable and What if they just simply? Art they just are gonna continue to make things really painful for you how do , is there ever a time where it's to cut people off for go that's all correct Yes obviously my mission is to try to help people suffer less and to try to prevent estrangements if we can but there is absolutely a time where you need to assess if this relationship is sustainable or not and for me because this is just personal there's no one person that can say you should cut off your parents if they do X Y Z it is a personal decision everybody knows when they get to their breaking point but for me personally it would be if my parents or in-law was abusive in any way to me if I felt their criticisms now moved into more threats or if my mental health was deteriorating then I would just be this isn't sustainable for me and I mean I have an example just to kind of put it in perspective some people might even the mother-in-law example some people the first example this might be too much for someone but for me I would be able to handle this if my mother-in-law consistently came over I would be able to handle this if my mother-in-law consistently came over unannounced she just refused to respect giving me a heads up and I would mind my boundary every time oh thank you much for coming over it's not a good time let's schedule something later this week let's say she gives me a snarky comment acts very injured gets in the car smears me to family they call and say I can't believe you kicked her off her porch I could calmly correct them that's not what happened and that's it I'm with that I'm that's sustainable for me'll wrap each clip up and then show them to anyone and send them home hearts of gratitude and thanks people anyway I am gonna take a quick break bridge that was a good option I think we talked to a specific group of people who are feeling both low- graph sluggishness and devastated because they have lost their thumbs toudoos now when difference brings us to what's most unbearable that's wrong with us people, as they make these decisions, because I think there's a tendency for people to say, , it hurts my mental health as in , oh, it makes me feel stressed or anxious to interact with this person. And I can understand , oh, if that's really impacting your mental health to the point where you're not functioning, it's really interrupting your ability to function in work or life or your relationships. That's one thing. But it's , it is normal that relationships are going to be sometimes uncomfortable. , we can create some space for that without immediately , , I just don't you, I don't, I'm cutting you off. And I think there are consequences to that, outcomes that people will mourn later on. I mean, you just have to weigh those. You have to weigh out, , benefits, pros and cons in these situations. it's a good example. . You want to share your story? . my husband and I, we actually went through an estrangement with his parents. And I just think it's important to understand that sometimes you may not realize that. your parents or your in-laws limitations until that first time you say no, and you actually hold your ground. And for us, that didn't happen until our kids were eight and 10 years old. And it was a very jarring experience. It was very shocking. But , we had just some very difficult, big difficulties with our son and behaviors that he was having towards his sister. And I think it was two years just trying different parenting strategies, consulting. And we had to deal with experts just trying to figure out what was going on. And a big incident happened and we made a very important parenting decision. And we communicated our parenting decision that we felt was best for our son to both sides of our family. my side was , they actually cried for us. , oh, that would be hard for you guys as parents. , we're going to support you 100. And then we went to his side and we communicated what was going on and what our plan was. And they just were , absolutely. Absolutely not. We're not in support of this. We don't have to listen to you. We're going to do what we want to do. And we 100 and we had it was a plan that we needed everybody to work with us. And we're , oh my gosh, . And my husband was shocked that they were saying this. He was just , oh my gosh, I'm I'm the dad. And his dad was , no, , this isn't happening. It was crazy. he was , my boy. . , it was. We were just , what's happening here? And we had always had struggles, , with them seeing us as parents. we honestly did not. We felt they were parenting us and our kids, but we it was never anything this apparent. at that moment, this decision was important to us that he's , , we're going to take a two week break we can implement our plan. And then we'll just talk to you in two weeks. that turned into a two year estrangement. Not . It was absolutely devastating. And throughout the two years we had tried to get together and talk and explain our side, explain how he made, they made Ryan feel and explain, , how hurt we were and where we needed them to take accountability. And we'd even joke just with ourselves, , it's , they're allergic to accountability. what's going on here. And finally the last meeting, it was, it was before the second year. We would have missed Christmas as a family. it was rounding the two year mark we met. And that's when we realized, oh my gosh, no matter how much time has passed, they're still on day one, they hadn't progressed. they were, they had suffered an immense amount. Their physical appearance had changed. I mean, it was, this estrangement was devastating to everybody, but you could see physically how much they had suffered. They hadn't changed. They hadn't, they couldn't see our perspective at all. They couldn't nothing had moved. And that's when they had done , if something that happened to me, I would spend time asking the question, huh, is there something I've done that might contribute to this? I would ask people around me, , what would you do in this situation? Do you have any advice for me? Can you help me see this more clearly? And they were , we're completely offended. this is your fault. You guys are bad people or something that. . And in their defense, they truly believed they were doing what was best for our child. Sure. And they felt their way was the only way their way was the way. And we were the bad guys. And in this meeting, they still felt I'm carrying the torch for my grandson and, and, and we're going to do what's . And it's , holy buckets. And it was just the most bizarre thing to finally realize, , I was looking at my husband and I'm , he's never going to get what he's looking for here. , and he had aged 10 years through this, the whole thing, it was the worst experience ever. And I'm , we're all suffering much. they're just wasting away. My husband's wasting and deteriorating. Our kids are just without their grandparents who had been very much involved in their lives. We're talking, they were involved in their lives three plus times a week. We would spend time with them. this was a very big deal. And that's when I'm , we're going to have to figure out how to heal by ourselves. You're never going to get the apology you deserve. You're never going to get the accountability. We're going to have to figure out how to do this alone. We're going to have to change our expectations here. Now that we understand what's actually going on, we're going to change our expectations and figure out what boundaries we need to make ourselves feel safe and keep our peace and still move forward. And that's how we reunited is getting a different perspective of what was really going on. , that's a very mature stance to take, which is saying I'm going to do, I'm going to be 100 responsible for my half of this situation. I'm just going to do everything I can on my half of this to make this situation better. is it better now? . . I mean, I don't think it will ever be the same because on the parent side that when you were strange on the parent side, they always have to go through life now knowing that their child was willing or able, capable of doing that to them. And they're just scared that would ever happen again. And I think they'll always go through life. Very scared that we could do that to them again. . , and the truth about relationships with adults is that they can always choose to leave, they can leave the relationship with you. And you have to choose to build relationships built around inviting, not controlling, pulling people in instead of demanding that they stay, ? . . And now that we have a clear understanding of what we're doing, we're , , we're going to do this. . we're going to do this. We're going to do this. . We have to know what it is. And we actually, before all this happened, when we had the estrangement, we didn't know what a boundary was. we would , before we actually stood firm on this no, our entire child rearing years, we had tried to set boundaries, but really we were just telling them what to change. we didn't know what a boundary was. We were just telling them , stop doing this. And we were expecting them to change. But then when we reunited, we understood anything that we set for a boundary is something we have to enforce. And it's a completely different dynamic now. can you set boundaries with them now? Oh, . . Oh, . We wouldn't have gone back into it without it. . it was a ton of different boundaries. And it was very slow, just kind of trying to earn back some trust. But, , it's definitely a good relationship. , I've always had a really good relationship with my mother-in-law. , she's done a fabulous job being a mother-in-law, and I'm going to do many things that she taught me, , once I become a mother-in-law. And I just see many benefits to the relationship. We just now realize there's some limitations, and we've accepted that, and then we adjust our expectations now. That's great. . . Any other last thoughts you want to touch on before we wrap up? I don't think . I think that's basically it. I mean, I think I'm done. . I got it covered, , why we're doing this and stuff and putting much time into it. I'm truly just trying to help people suffer less. Because I feel if we have a different understanding, or if we even just ask the question after, , you hear all these experts say, , , they need to be willing to go to therapy. They need to be willing to make these changes. And I think there has to be an extension on that sentence, , either willing or, , maybe they're not able, and we need to accept that they're not able. , they actually have. , I have this idea that maybe at some point we'll have actual more brain scans, and we'll be able to see that because of trauma. Because we know trauma changes brain structure. , maybe we'll actually be able to physically say this is why, , they stayed the same. , it wasn't a choice. . It makes sense. And I think there's a lot of other things that impact emotional processing, including, , executive dysfunction, , ADHD, , working memory, , and being highly emotional. , a lot of things impact processing, and maybe we'll be able to dial that in better in the future. That'd be really cool. It would be. It really would be. And I just hope that more. I just want to have more conversations around maybe accepting. Because even if I just think, even if I was estranging from my mom, and I'm very close with my mom, but if I was estranging from her because the relationship was unstable, and if I knew she couldn't change and it wasn't a choice, I would go on with more peace. Then, , anger and resentment, my mom was choosing not to get better for me. , and what you're describing is interesting, because I think a lot of people go to individual therapy, and they see a therapist who's been trained in individual modalities. they'll see a psychiatrist or an LCSW or an LPC, a practitioner of counseling. And all of them have been trained in basically a linear way of thinking of , , you do this, and they do this. And if you can't, , set a boundary and make them change, then you're not going to be able to do it. -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . And what we do influences, , how the other person responds. . And what this does, it gives us a ton of information. ton of power and a ton of clarity on if we're a in this situation, all we can do is change everything on our half. But when we do that, it often influences how the other person responds. And doing things , , being more compassionate understanding of where the other person is coming from, that changes how we interact with them, understanding that they have rejection fears, it changes how we interact with them. And it might invite change on their half. And even if it doesn't, we change on our half, and it's . , , exactly. And I love the way you just put that out there. That's , it's clear when you draw it out. , my brain looks beautiful. , I only think with diagrams. Oh, my gosh. . But , , I think marriage and family therapists, people are trained to think systemically are more likely to be more creative in their solutions when it comes to these relationships. I think it's worth it to try lots of things on our half of a relationship and see what shifts in the whole, the whole system. I think , too. And just going back to , because I know some people, I don't ever want people to get in, the wrong idea that I'm saying estrangement isn't, , that's just a personal choice. sometimes that's, that's a permanent decision for people. For us, the suffering was, I mean, you, when you first cut off contact, you might get some sort of immediate relief, , oh, this type of stress is gone. But now you have a different type of shadow or heaviness over you all the time. And yes, that's grief. But for us, it just wasn't, it wasn't sustainable to stay estranged. it was literally just eating my husband alive. it wasn't, it wasn't for him, he was suffering. And it wasn't their behaviors were to that extreme that it was that was necessary. It was just us understanding what actually was happening, in terms of boundaries. And it was us having to grow and fit in, make adjustments to then reunite. For sure. I love it. I love it. . , tell, tell my audience, where they can find you and tell them about your free guide. Oh, . I made, if you liked the idea of , what I'm talking about with the clear guide, or the clear formula, I just put it in a free guide, it talks a little bit about emotionally immature people, and just how it kind of impacts the couple's relationship. But then I also just walk you through four really, relatable scenarios. you can familiarize yourself with the framework. you'll have that in the description. . And I'm just on all platforms at Mind Your Boundaries. Awesome. , make sure to check her out. She always goes over the most fascinating examples. People send her their questions, and she gives great ideas. I love it. Thank you. Thank you, Jess, much for being here. Really appreciate it. Have a great day. Thank you. Thank you. Bye. Hi there. If you found anything in this video helpful, I would really appreciate it if you could give it a thumbs up or share it with someone who could benefit from it today.