Ladies and gentlemen and everyone in between and outside, in Europe, in Germany, a lot is not in order at the moment. But even if we have reason to complain, enough reason to complain, we can all be happy together that it is not as bad as in the USA, the United States of America, the USA, good lord, good lord, what's going on there? It's time. Today we will talk about what I just discussed in the ZDF Magazine Royale, your uncancelled German satire late night show, what's going on in the USA. Show by Trump critic Jimmy Kimmel cancelled. How did it come about? What do you mean? What, what, what, what? After intense protests, Jimmy Kimmel returns with late night show. Huh? Whose late night show is not cancelled in the USA now, or cancelled? What? Trump critic Stephen Colbert loses TV show. Ladies and gentlemen and everyone in between and outside, there is a lot going on in America and that's why we have today in the ZDF Magazine Royale built an American late night studio on purpose. Just to discuss with you in real time what's going on over there on the other side of the Atlantic. What we have been sure to know since this week, the late night power relationship between Germany and the USA has turned. It's nothing before. We looked up to the Americans for 80 years, but since this week US American late night moderators are looking up to us, to German late night stars. Wow, there he is. Mr. Burt, I am. terribly sorry to disturb you. Why are you done? , I'm just a huge fan. My name is John and I host a late night comedy show on HBO. Comedy? . I hate comedy. Germany! Germany, we're back! The German Bernd steals the English-American John's late night show. That's the new German self-confidence compared to the USA. Yes! Raab offers talkmaster Jimmy Kimmel his show. Absurd! But even more absurd is that Jimmy Kimmel is the only American late night show host. Jimmy Kimmel even got that. I heard from late night hosts in other countries, from Ireland and from Germany. The guy in Germany offered me a job. Can you imagine? This country has become authoritarian, the Germans are , come here. It's funny because it's sadly true. Hey, Jimmy Kimmel, just to clarify. This is the German late night show that German guy named Stefan Raab offered you to host. Enjoy. I'm really out of retirement, Stefan. No pixels? No pixels, no pixels. Let's do some tricks. Go ahead. Here we go. We're going to start with, knowing what time it is, this is the wristwatch. German television, popular all over the world. Freedom of speech until the urologist cries. At the latest, that is the proof. Germany is now better than the USA, in general, culturally and politically. Not because we are particularly good, but because the USA is just fucking mean. We have to stop talking about the end of US democracy. We are far beyond that point. The United States is a authoritarian regime. We can discuss whether it is fascist or not. But we have no limits. We have no limits. As a German, I don't want to call it fascism, but what do you think? What does this look to you? Extraordinary images out of Los Angeles tonight. Hundreds of National Guard troops now on the ground, deployed by President Trump. Definitely a chaotic scene on Eureka Street Thursday as Worcester police and ICE agents detained a mother and her 16-year-old daughter. That girl's face slammed into the ground as she was taken into custody. Trump and his acolytes have blamed the, quote, radical left for Kirk's assassination. Several businesses and organizations took action against employees for their public comments about Kirk's assassination. The murder of the -wing extremist Charlie Kirk. Why does the ZDF magazine Royal call Charlie Kirk a -wing extremist? That's why the Spiegel calls Charlie Kirk a -wing extremist. Because the Spiegel does that too. Please cancel the Spiegel first and then us. First the Spiegel, then us. Since the murder of the -wing extremist Charlie Kirk, the United States has been still as violent as ever. Charlie Kirk is still as violent as ever. Charlie Kirk is still as violent as ever. He was a missionary with a noble spirit and a great, great purpose. He did not hate his opponents. He wanted the best for them. That's where I disagreed with Charlie. I hate my opponent. And I don't want the best for them. I'm sorry. How do you comfort a community of sorrow? Exactly. With hate. Dear US President, I am your Stefan Raab. And as a German, I would to call upon you over the Great Plains. Political violence and hate, that shows our German experience, are no solution. After the death of Charlie Kirk, the US government ranks Antifa as a terror group. Antifa. Actually, Antifa means nothing but antifascism. Antifa was once what landed in Normandy in June 1944 and defeated the Nazis. Antifascism was once US-American pride. And now the US government is using the murder of Charlie Kirk, to explain to Antifa, political opponents to terrorists. That is. I don't know if I should say this as a German, but that is political will. Just saying as a German. I'm just saying what I see. And blurry images of enemies Antifa, to persecute political opponents, on the way to fascism and autocracy, has this, I say as a German, method. Emergency warning. The Democratic Deep State has killed Charlie Kirk. The Democratic Deep State has killed Charlie Kirk. The Democratic Deep State has killed Charlie Kirk, says the -wing US-American hate podcaster, Alex Jones. What is the Deep State? What is this Deep State? It sounds a normal conspiracy theory, the one about the round earth, or the crazy idea that the ancient Egyptians invented electricity. The pyramids are structured in such a way, that even the underground tunnel passages, attached to the Nile, have generated electricity through the kinetic water energy. Then the whole thing with the metallic, golden tip on top, from the ether, energy was basically still pumped, from below and from above, energy, which was then spread. I think you can say that much. Yes, you can. You can say, colleague, but you don't have to, absolutely. But hey, freedom of speech, say what you want, we live in Germany. , let's go away for a moment from the timeline noise on our screens, around Stephen Colbert, Jimmy Kimmel and Charlie Kirk, and look at each other, what happens in reality in the USA. And now quite openly. The Deep State, the Deep State, that is the central conspiracy theory, and the trans people and anti-farm and migrants, the central enemy for the US government. The Deep State, the Deep State, describes a theory widespread in -wing US circles, that secret services, security agencies and ministerial officials form a kind of shadow government, which pursues its own agenda and controls itself, and which is then withdrawn by the president and parliament. Yes, funny, dear fellow Germans, something similar was also told by the leader of our grandparents back then. But in the USA it is now the Deep State. The Deep State is to blame for everything. I will shatter the Deep State and restore government that is controlled by the people and for the people. To shatter the Deep State. That is the goal of the double-fried Big Mac Bolsonaro in his second term of office. that something this doesn't happen to him again. US Justice Minister opposes Trump. Trump threatens to file a lawsuit. The FBI investigated against President Trump. Yes, of course, that's why the most powerful, most senile criminal of the world wants to shatter the Deep State now. Of course, the Oompa Loompa in chief cannot implement this plan alone, because. Because also as a president, you need a great team. Yes, exactly. Teamwork, teamwork makes the regime work. And against the Deep State the US regime is now working only the smartest heads of the United States of America. And he here. My name is Kash Patel and I have written the first ever Children's Russiagate book. It's called The Plot Against the King. Haha! Child book author, lawyer and Deep State destroyer Kash Patel. Now you're probably , wait a minute, especially in Germany, careful with child book authors in political responsibility. That can be bad for you. We know that. what qualifies the American Otfried Preuüler with the seductive hot spot look for a top job in the US regime? Everything you need to know about Kash Patel's qualifications can be found here in his child book. This is the original. The Plot Against the King. The plot against the king. And in his book it goes, this is no joke, I read it myself, about the mean queen, Hillary Quinton, who wants to prevent the rule of King Donald with a nasty dirt campaign. It's no joke. The only one who can save King Donald is the -known discoverer and magician, Kash. It's. And this man, who wrote this book, is now the director of the FBI, the most important American police agency. Of course not the FBI, but the FBI. The FBI is the most important American police agency. Not the FBI, not the FBI. Of course not only because he wrote a children's book, but also because he wrote a book of facts. This one. Government Gangsters. The Deep State, the Truth and the Battle for our Democracy. The Deep State, the Truth and the Battle for our Democracy. And because Kash Patel knew that the salmon-colored staircase failure, whose favor he wants to get with such books, doesn't to read books, he made an investigative documentary out of his book. Government Gangsters are the group of individuals, career bureaucrats, who have been installed by what we call the Deep State into every agency and department in the United States government. Government Gangster. The Deep State is everywhere. The entire US administration is made up of the Deep State, says Kash Patel. Of course we don't know if Jeffrey Epstein's letter friend read this nonsense, but for a quote, on the front of the cover of this book, it was enough. We will use this blue break as an aid to get the White House back and remove these gangsters from the state apparatus. A quote from the American president on the front of this book. Remove inner enemies from the state apparatus. Get the country back. Ey, just saying, as a German, I somehow feel I'm getting to know it again, in a way. Behind the scenes, Patel's vision takes a different form. The idea of the Deep State is to get the country back from the State Department. The idea of the Deep State is to get the country back from the State Department. The idea of the Deep State is to get the country back from the State Department. This is Patel's vision of the FBI under President Trump in a silent effort. FBI agents were forced to leave. Others were 274 00RD expsy without reason, or on vacation. Besides, Patel forces his employees to lie detector tests, with the aim of finding out the sources of leaks. This is the US American reality. It's now. If you don't swear loyalty to the Supreme leader, he has to Ä he probably works for the Deep State. He'll get replaced. Not only in the FBI, but also in U.S. agencies who at first glance have nothing to do with politics. Meteorologists are now facing a Trump loyalty test when they apply for the National Weather Service. Because the naked king wants sun. Go! Hoppala, in the face of excitement. Sorry. On Sunday . Sorry. On Sunday more sunshine from the north. Excuse me. Careful. Who coughs three times is suspected of belonging to the Deep State, Sven. Under Pope Popes, the 5 after 12, the wind has turned in the United States of America. Anyone who wants to apply for a US federal agency must really be considering such questions. How would you contribute to the decrees and political priorities of the president in this position? Yes, how? Maybe lick the ass of the king? That seems to work for others. Tech billionaires, for example. Thanks for hosting us. This is quite a group to get together. I want to thank you for including me. Thank you for being such a pro-business, pro-innovation president. It's a very refreshing change. Thank you for incredible leadership, including getting this group together. Thank you, Bill. That is very nice. Licked the ass. Mark Zuckerberg, Tim Cook, Sam Altman, Bill Gates, some of the richest and most powerful men in the world are stuck up to the collarbones in the 12-finger gut of the authoritarian whirlwind from Bad Wasserbein. Oh, oh, oh, watch out! Flying sandwich! What the fuck, eh? Yes, then that happened too. The US president sends the National Guard to Washington DC, the American capital, to terrorize the population. And there a man throws a police officer with a sandwich. Can I see that again? Actually, that would be funny. Oh! Oh! Yes, free after the old Sponti motto. Hit the asses of bulls. Actually quite funny. Actually quite funny. But in a democratically counted democracy the US American democracy, a flying sandwich can become a case for the US Justice Minister in person. Pam Bondi. I just found out that the defendant worked in the Ministry of Justice. Not anymore. He is not only fired, but was charged with a crime. This is an example of the Deep State we have been fighting with for seven months. This is an example of the Deep State we have been fighting with for seven months. While we are working to re-organize the Ministry of Justice. The Deep State throws bread. What did Bernd know? Leave me alone. I am also of the opinion that the only thing the USA can save now is fascism. Trump is apparently pushing the US Ministry of Justice to negotiate against political opponents. The US feels a autocratic, fascist state change. I think . Freedom of opinion. I can say that differently here than my colleagues in America. Fortunately in Germany everything is free. Uncensored. In the uncancelled ZDF magazine Royal. In your free second German television. Ladies and gentlemen and everyone in between and outside. In front of our eyes the American democracy is dying. The US American democracy. Not on purpose, but according to plan. Project 2025 is a political master plan of the conservative think tanks. The goal is to weaken the influence of the US federal institutions and expand the power of the president. Project 2025. For all those who don't want to read the 900 pages, here is the short summary. This brainless and hateful, brainless wigs for racists and fascists is simply disgusting. Wrong book, Dennis, but the analysis is correct. Project 2025. Project 2025 is supposed to give the manic Mar-a-Lago-mandarin even more power than it already does. And who could better implement this plan in action than a man who wrote about it himself? The man who now holds the reins of the armed forces in his hands according to the opinion of conservatives is Russell Vogt. Nominal director of the Office of Management and Budget in the White House. Russell Vogt, who is currently reporting on the question which ass just fucked, manages the money in the White House of the US state authorities. The money of the US state authorities. US federal authorities. And if you film him with a hidden camera, he also says very openly what he really has to do with the USA. I want to be the person that crushes the deep state. I think there's a lot of different ways to do that. It is defunding it, it's impoundment, the ability to not spend money, it's getting rid of their independence. Federal authorities withdrawing the money to defeat the deep state. And with deep state of course everyone means that the Make America Great Again regime doesn't fit into the crap. The Trump administration is demanding new powers to keep billions of dollars for social housing, education, medical research and other state programs that have already been approved by Congress. That is also reality. Especially now. Now. Federal authorities only get money when they are politically tight on the presidential term. What the US parliament says that should actually limit the power of the president is fucking irrelevant. Nobody cares anymore. That's what Russell Vought in the US has been doing. The White House to the state in the state. The White House to the state in the state. Wait a minute. Instead of rusting out the alleged deep state, Trump aims to actually build a state in the state. With the goal of forming a government that is more powerful and more party- than ever before in the history of the country. Can that be? To fight the deep state under the pretext of? That's what I'm trying to say. I'm trying to say that the White House is a political party. And that's what I'm trying to say. I'm trying to say that the White House is a political party. And that's what I'm trying to say. And that's what I'm trying to say. To fight the deep state? Does the spy from Castle Assault just build up his own deep state? Unbelievable. Yes, unbelievable, Christina Schrder. And all this is happening now while you are sitting in front of the TV and watching old bifis on the sofa. The US American democracy, which we owe to our German democracy, makes our old German mistakes. Only in color and with uncooler uniforms. The turntables have turned. Do you understand? The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The turntables have turned. The target history is on us interrupting the German-American relationship, better than anything else. Talk about late-night Ω Foundation- calendar byôôemohn-ªæuar spaced out long, short telegram by turnaround by Fullitsu radio programming. The Turntables have turned with the past, and every post is better than any week, not even one. That story was taken from the newsreel from cake. But today, Germany's newsreel continues. But today, Germany's new portable TV channel shows Åªµbe certain false IMçÁüÈÅì implications. We are in a historical turning point in our German-American relations. Not only in the field of late-night conversation. Go, Bernth, go. We Germans are not only there, but everywhere. In an interview in November 2024, party leader Alice Weidel claimed that a deeper state in Germany would spread lies about the AfD and try to discredit the AfD. In the next two to three years. And then we'll see what happens. But enough of the sideline, we watched and did nothing. We, the ZDF Magazin Royale, are an interventionist show. We are leaving our Western-German The pregnant Auster, world famous, put by the Americans into free West Berlin. A real time capsule and in the vicinity of the American embassy, from the Reichstag, spooks to the Chancellor's Office. Friedrich Merz, warm the buckwheat, we're coming. Mix the Romy cards and free the visitors. I have to sleep somewhere. The ZDF magazine royal comes to cuddle in Berlin. Be there or not. contains an original ou Åªåarety