There's a moment in life that just stops you cold. And it's not when something bad happens exactly, it's when something bad happens and you realize you're facing it completely alone. And that moment came for me after years of holding it together. I'd been through a brutal divorce. When I tried dating again eventually, the guy died. I'd had 14 major surgeries in just all of this was in a few years. And as everything was falling apart, I looked around for help, for support, for someone to show up with soup or sit with me on the worst day. And people would show up, sort of, , they'd come, they'd bring something, they'd talk for a little bit. But it's just that these hardships, these surgeries and stuff, they just kept happening. And after a while people stopped coming. And then I was alone. I had no real friends, not the kind who show up, not the kind you can call in a crisis. They're just, , people I knew. And I had been there for some of them, but it just turned out not to be a reciprocal relationship. They were people I'd seen at work or at events or in passing, but no one, , who I could lean on when I needed it the most. And this hit me , , a punch in the chest. I had built my whole life this way and I had to face that. , I was friendly with everyone, but I was close to no one. And it wasn't that I didn't want friends. I wanted them desperately, but something was in the way. Some invisible membrane. That's what it felt . Something between me and other people. And I finally had to ask myself the question I'd been avoiding for decades, , why don't I have close friendships? And why has it always been this way? And that was the moment everything started to change. The path was changed and I changed what I believed I was doing to myself. Not just, , be confident, but to be able to do my job , get in support of people and find some help. And I started with these experiences. for example, if you step on an ifra, instead of just the food, the stupid, brutal approach with charged and really dangerous沒有 ВOffе. Or something you would to do very quickly, something that would go through a lot. need anyone to never expect attention or help or affection from anyone. I built a life where I never had to ask, where I never had to need anything, where I could do everything myself. But here's the thing. Trauma wounds don't just come from the disappointed feeling that you were neglected, the neglect itself can cause changes to your nervous system. In childhood development where you don't end up learning to naturally connect you were supposed to or you can't connect fully. And I've learned that it's incredibly common for traumatized people to feel a sense of disconnection from people in every part of their lives, in every kind of relationship. I didn't know that back then. I just knew that I felt separate from people. I could be in a room at a party, even with someone I loved and still feel completely disconnected. And then after my divorce and the death and all the surgery, when everything fell apart, I saw the full cost of what this life of disconnection was because you can kind of be independent when you physically can take care of yourself. But when you need people, you need people. And I didn't have anyone who would show up. And I realized I wasn't just unlucky with friends. There had to be something I was doing because it was a pattern. I was isolating. But isolation doesn't just happen. It's not a random condition. It's a set of behaviors and habits and reactions that end up pushing people away or you end up pulling away. I started to study myself and what I found shocked me. I found I thought that I was good at this, but I found I had nine obstacles. I counted them. I wrote them down. This was a whole journal that I had nine obstacles inside me that had been blocking connection my whole life. And these are common in people with trauma, and they're sneaky. You don't always see them away, but they shape everything. here's what they looked for me. First, I felt I didn't belong. I didn't feel I belonged anywhere. Sometimes I thought I did for five seconds or a day, and then the feeling would come. No matter where I was, I had the sense that I was different. there was a secret code everyone else got and that I didn't get it. I found out that's normal. Number two was I was socially awkward. I didn't know how to be myself in front of other people. I made a lot of jokes, but not always at the moment. I could be alienating with my sense of humor, and it would come off as insensitive. Sometimes I either said nothing to compensate for this. I would just be really quiet or I would say too much. Three is I lacked social attunement, and I just I missed cues. I didn't always pick up on what people needed. Sometimes I talked over people or I gave advice when all they needed was to be heard. Then number four, I couldn't trust my perception. I was either hyper vigilant and seeing rejection where there wasn't any, or I was completely blind to red flags. I didn't know how to tell what was really going on with people. Five was my boundaries were all over the place. Sometimes I had walls. Other times I just let people. , all over my life. Just come treat me bad, do whatever, because I didn't want to lose them. And I was afraid to say anything about what was bothering me. Number six was I ended up with a lot of mean and troubled people in my life. I also know that's very common for traumatized people. And this happened not because I wanted it to happen and definitely not because I thought I deserved it. I didn't think I deserved bad treatment, but because I couldn't see the red flags. I just didn't know how to tell when someone was unstable or even dangerous until I was already in too deep. I was attached. And even when things felt wrong, I would second guess myself. I assumed if there's a problem, it's got to be me. And that kind of red flag blindness, it doesn't mean you're weak. It means your early experiences probably distorted your radar. And when you can't see trouble when it's staring you in the face, it makes connection feel walking through a minefield. Number seven, I didn't believe people cared about me. Some didn't, but I would behave as if, , I either didn't open up at all or I overwhelm people by pouring out my whole life story too fast. , I better get it all in. I got to get all the communication in five minutes because I would just feel I just thought people didn't care and they were about to get up and leave. But that's not really connecting, is it? Number eight was my emotions were dysregulated. I'd either shut down completely or I'd explode and I didn't know how to be present with people. And I was , I'm going to be a person when I was at the same time feeling strong emotions, which I was. When you're going through a hard time, that's what's going on. I was , I was somebody who was just learning to drive, brakes, gas pedal, brakes, gas pedal. And nine was I focused too much on other people. And it wasn't because I wanted to fix them. I know that's common, but it was because focusing on them kept the attention off of me, it kept my attention off of me. Maybe. And I thought what I was seeing was their potential. And I just go, oh, they have amazing potential. And I'd almost be angry that they seem to refuse to be the person I believe them to be capable of being when I first met them. But all of that was a projection. I think doing this helped me avoid the emptiness in my own life. And it was hard to face. I needed a project. I would have rather had somebody who I was proud to have in my life and could take places, but I didn't. I would put tremendous effort into it. I would put tremendous pressure on people. It's , come on, act normal. And meanwhile, I'd over listen, I'd over share, I'd over accommodate. And then I'd wonder why I felt invisible or resentful. And I thought I was being loving, but really, I was just disappearing. And the thing about me and many people is I can only disappear for long. At a certain point, I'll snap and then I'll be angry. I'll just be , why are you allowing me to disappear? that was kind of how I rolled back then. And when I saw these patterns, I felt a mix of grief and relief. It was grief because of all the years I'd lived without real connection, but relief because finally I had a map. I had something I could work on, something I could change. And that's what I did. I started taking steps to undo each of those nine obstacles one by one. And it wasn't instant. It took time. Some things happen quick. Some things take time. It was uncomfortable. Sometimes it was embarrassing, but it worked. It did work. Hey, I've got a quick invite for you. I made a free daily practice course that shows you two simple techniques to calm the storm when you're triggered inside. It's short, it's powerful, and it helps you feel clearer, more focused, and more at ease. Fast. Click the second link in the description section below or use the QR code there and you can start your course away. Here are the shifts that made the difference for me. And what? I have a whole book. I wrote a whole book about what I learned from this, how to connect with people. It's called Connectability. You can order that now. There's a link down in the description section, or you can go to Connectabilitybook.com. here's what I did. One was I softened my avoidant behaviors. I stopped ghosting people. I stopped disappearing. And when I got scared, I stayed just a little longer each time, just enough to kind of talk things out. Number two was I taught my heart that I belong. Sometimes I just had to tell myself because I didn't naturally believe it. I didn't wait to be invited to things. I would just show up. I participated. I invited other people to do things. They sometimes didn't respond, but I just kept going. I let people see me even when I felt awkward. It was second nature to me. I didn't automatically know how to do it, but I just kept trying. And then it got easier. All . Then I let myself be awkward and I kept going. I gave myself permission to be clunky and weird because I am kind of weird. And I didn't run away when I said something weird. I just tried to let myself be human. And I healed my powers of perception, too. I practice noticing. I learned to ask questions. I stopped assuming and started clarifying. , when I didn't understand something, I asked a question , could I just ask a question? Is this meant to be a date? Stuff that. But I used to just , sweat it out. And just feel confused. I became a better observer. I strengthened my boundaries. I started saying no. When I felt saying no, it's . I could make a plan with somebody to do something and then change my mind and say, what, this isn't going to work for me today. And I didn't want to be rude and inconsiderate and just run people through exhausting changes because of my personality. But just once in a while when it was really true, I just said, no, no, thanks. I told the truth. I didn't explain or apologize for needing space or to prioritize something else. And I stopped complaining that people walked all over me. They can't when you don't have a boundary problem anymore. And I learned that only I could change who I hung out with. I would just complain about the people in my life. And then I was , , , who decides who I hang out with? Me. I changed that. And I let go of mean and troubled people. I stopped giving my energy to people who drained me or mistreated me or left me hanging or just I ended up feeling anxious all the time around them. I let those connections go. And mostly I just did it quietly. I didn't make big speeches or anything. It didn't take a big effort. The last thing I needed when I was healing was big, dramatic goodbyes or arguments. I made space by just letting go. And the space opened up for people who were kind, who had they were interested in becoming friends with me. And I began to believe that people do care. And I listened more. I stopped trying to prove myself. I let people in slowly. And they didn't instantly become my best friend or my boyfriend. And I let them show up for me. I just would let sort of information come to me about , , who is this person? How is our dynamic? I regulated my emotions. That's a learned skill, by the way. If you haven't learned how to do that, you can do that in a number of my courses, dysregulation boot camp and healing childhood PTSD. you can check those out, too, on my website, crappychildhoodfairy.com. I used I always talk about the daily practice, but that's what I did. I use the daily practice techniques because when you start to make big changes in your life and set boundaries and people are mad at you and falling away, you need a way to deal with all the feelings that come up. If you've been living with trauma for a long time, there's a lot of jammed up thoughts and feelings, it's very crowded in there. And when something kind of painful is happening, you made a hard decision and now you feel kind of guilty, you need space to process that and stay real with it and figure out what you need to do about it, if anything. with my daily practice at the time I was making these changes, I had actually quit for two years, I was mad that my marriage fell through. I was scared that I was left with two little kids and not very much work. And I did pull it together. It was . It all worked out just fine. But it was scary then. But I was mad because I guess in my first 12 years of the daily practice, in the back of my mind, I thought it was a magic trick. And if I was good and I did the techniques, I would get everything I wanted. And I thought I wanted the marriage to last. It turns out the marriage ending was one of the best things that ever happened. But it was a very hard road for a couple of years. I didn't see that away. And gradually I realized how bad things got. when I wasn't doing my daily practice for two years, the downfall didn't happen away. It was just this gradual drift. And it took me a long time to go, wait a second. This isn't a coincidence. This isn't all just bad luck that I was losing a lot of my ability. I was losing my red flag detector. I was losing my self confidence. I was losing my energy. I was losing my boundaries. Just problems were just escalating in my life. And it got bad enough that I finally returned to my daily practice. And it was , overnight things changed direction again. And it didn't take long for things to start moving back in a better direction. I don't think it ever, , life, you never get exactly back to where you started when you recover from a dip that. You go to a new place and it can be even better than it was before. Because now you have, , in my case, I have lost that delusion, that illusion that if I was a good girl, I would get everything I wanted. Life isn't that. Sometimes what you want is not the thing that's going to work. And you lose or you get something better. I don't know. I don't tend to have magical thinking about that. But you cannot make everything go your way. You just can't. And I think the game of recovery, the object of the game is that you learn to be , and happy, whatever is going on. And that's what safety is. That's what confidence is. You come to believe in your heart that I don't know what's going to happen. But whatever it is, I'm confident. I'm confident that I'll figure something out. I'll know how to deal with it. And that is freedom. That's a real freedom. I learned to calm my nervous system. And I didn't know that's what the daily practice was doing for me at the time. I didn't learn that until 2014, that there was a such thing as nervous system dysregulation. As soon as I read what it is, I was , that's exactly what I have. Now people talk about it all the time. You probably know what it is. In my early videos, I had to explain it every time. It's , , your nervous system is glitching. All your body systems are prone to sort of get disrupted. And it can affect your emotions and your thinking and your hormones. And you get discombobulated and clumsy, and your emotions can go too big or too small. a lot of stuff happens. I learned to regulate that. I didn't have a word for it, but my daily practice, it turns out, all along had been this marvelous tool that would help me to re-regulate, not just in my emotions. Emotions are one piece of the pie. Neurological dysregulation is a lot of things. Emotional dysregulation is the one other people can tell. They can see it. When we're lashing out, they're , gosh, this is unfair. When our hormones are going a little bit in the wrong direction, you don't even notice it, let alone everybody else. most of the stuff that happens from dysregulation is you can't feel it, but you'll feel it downstream with how it affects you. when I got back to my daily practice, all I knew was I felt better, and I gave myself time to keep working on it. I didn't jump into new things. And I really, really practiced putting my attention on that moment when something triggered me and how I reacted. I practiced. I don't think I would have called it this at the time, but it was being present, just not running away, not shutting down, not panicking, not trying to control the situation, but just kind of letting it in. What was going on? That used to be really uncomfortable for me, which is hard to imagine now. I no longer had to make every situation feel or assume something was wrong just because I was uncomfortable. I just stopped taking crap from people. I just was able to stand up for myself or walk away from situations. And that used to feel rocket science to me. But with a little practice, it started coming naturally. And I brought the focus back to myself, not in a selfish way. I used to think it was selfish to do that. But if you're not focusing on yourself, you can go quite numb to what your effect on other people is, what's happening. when I'm I got more grounded and I was paying more attention and taking care of myself. One thing that changed is I stopped over functioning. I didn't even know there was a word for that. But I used to jump in and try to handle a lot of stuff for other people when I didn't need to. And I still have that tendency kind of waiting there. But you can let other people be responsible for their own lives. Friendships began to grow and it was slow at first, but then more and more. And there were people I could laugh with and people I could cry with and people who called me when they were hurting and who picked up the phone when I needed them. now I don't have a million close friends. I don't need that many, but I have a real circle now. People who love me and who I love back and we show up for each other. And that's not something I ever thought that I'd have. if you're in that place now where life is feeling really hard and you look around and you realize that you have no one, I just want you to know it can change. You're not broken and you're not cursed. You ever think that a lot of us do. I'm cursed, but you're not. And you're not too weird or too damaged or too late to have connections with people. You kind of just need a map. You just need to see the patterns and then go, , that's where I keep making a misstep. That's an obstacle for me. This is something I can change. And then you just take one brave step forward. Just one. It can be really small. It could be just sending a text or smiling at someone or saying yes the next time you get invited to something that you think you might want to do, you can write down your fears and resentments. Using my daily practice techniques, you can do that just for 90 seconds and then write the little thing where you ask for them to be removed instead of running away. Hey, it's me. And real fast, if you're watching my videos and wondering if maybe past trauma is having an effect on your life today, I want to share with you a list of signs that what you're struggling with now might be connected with neglect or abuse in your childhood. It's good to know this because it can help that what's hard for you now is normal and that healing is possible. You can download my Signs of Childhood PTSD Quiz by clicking the top link in the description section below or using that QR code there. that's how healing starts. Friendship isn't something that just happens lightning to lucky people. It's something that you build and you can build it even if no one ever showed you how. And I'm living proof. If I can do this, you can do this. Hey, if you that video, I've got one I know you're going to love. It's here and I will see you over there. Pushing people away that you can be alone is incredibly common with people who grew up with childhood trauma. If you keep using isolation to manage your CPTSD triggers, just about every hour, you'll be able to heal. Every option in your life will gradually close off to you.