Everyone is talking about dysregulation, but what does that mean and what can you do when it happens to you? I'm exactly the person to answer this for you. I even wrote a book about it, re-regulated. Dysregulation is a reaction. It can come up in response to stressors and it's especially common for people who have been through intense stress in the past, trauma. Now, everyone, not just traumatized people, get dysregulated sometimes and virtually everyone eventually re-regulates. But if you were traumatized at a young age, it can cause you to get dysregulated more easily than other people and to stay dysregulated longer. you can think of a newborn baby who is in distress. Their skin is red, they arch their back, , they're crying. And newborns they haven't yet learned to regulate and this is what it looks . They're born unable to regulate themselves. When their mom holds and feeds them, they will calm themselves. They come down. They're not desperate anymore. They're not in dysregulated crying. They're feeling calm and comforted. And then they come out alert and re-regulated. That's what it feels to get re-regulated. For a baby, the love, the food, and the contact with the mother's body help their nervous system to co-regulate. Co-regulate. You may have heard that term where you can match your nervous system regulation to someone else's. it's very normal in kids. But adults do it together too, or groups of people even. And you can see why a lack of attentive care can harm normal development of a child's nervous system and their ability to self-regulate. You can also see how parents who are themselves dysregulated struggle to help a kid to get regulated. The baby continues to cry, , for example, and it can't settle down. And this in turn can further dysregulate the parent. And then the parent is dysregulated. It dysregulates the baby and back and forth and back and forth. It's a vicious cycle. Now once what dysregulation is and you're aware of the feeling, you may be having, aha, that kind of moment, you might begin to notice dysregulation everywhere. that guy yelling at the post office clerk? He was dysregulated. Your mom, when she saw the mess everyone made and she started crying, she was dysregulated. That kid in the second grade in the classroom who seemed totally checked out and didn't hear that it was time to go to lunch, that kid was dysregulated. Now me, I was dysregulated when I got nervous asking for a raise that I knocked over a cup of coffee on all the papers on the desk and ruined the carpet of my boss. I was dysregulated. Do you have this? If you're a lot of us, it can be a huge relief to know that dysregulation, it's a thing. It's a thing and it's normal for people who have been through a lot. Here's what it can feel in adults. You feel spaced out. You're at a loss for words. You can't remember where you are for a minute. Or you feel scattered. You're trying to do a whole bunch of things at once and you're not finishing anything. You're tripping over things, dropping things, and you're trying to do a whole bunch of things at once and you're not finishing anything. Losing things. , where's my keys? Where's my purse? Where's my shoes? Your voice and your facial expression, sometimes after a big upset, they go flat, and it seems you feel nothing even though you do feel things. You are in a rage or you have this huge urgency to express what's bothering you, which by the way, is not a good time to express it, not when it feels urgent. You can't feel parts of your body. Your hands. Your mouth. Your face. Your nose. your nose or your feet start to feel numb. You're driving and suddenly you sort of come to and you're , I don't even remember getting here. The last 10 minutes, there's no memory. That's dysregulation. You feel flustered and overwhelmed and it makes it feel impossible to concentrate or finish a task. These are all common signs of dysregulation that you can notice. And there are many you can't actually feel that are affecting your hormones, your immune system, your vital signs. And those are very important to health and dysregulation can be disruptive to your health. the signs that you can feel are a good sign that there might be dysregulation on many levels. And luckily, even though you may never have been told this, you can learn to re-regulate. It takes practice. It's not actually that hard. It just takes a lot of repetition to get into the habit. There are long-term things that you can do to get good at re-regulation. My go-to method, is the daily writing and meditation practice that I call the daily practice. And I'll tell you about that in a minute. But this is how I get regulated and stay regulated every day. And over time, I get less dysregulated in the first place and slower to get dysregulated when something happens to kind of set it off. Now it's good to have a daily practice, but you also need something you can anytime on the spot use when you need it because whoops, you just slipped into dysregulation. It's good to master this. You can master these skills because if you stay dysregulated, it can be exhausting. It can keep you from remembering very who you spoke to and what happened during your day. It can make it hard to connect with other people and it can leave you vulnerable to intense emotions that are way oversized emotional dysregulation only because normal size feelings are running through a dysregulated nervous system. you could end up lashing out or having inexplicable sadness at the worst possible time. Or talking more than you really want to in a social situation. Those are forms of dysregulation too. Or driving off from the gas station with the gas pump still in your car. Have you done that? I did it twice in a single week. It wasn't good. They were really mad at the gas station and they had to charge me money. But as long as you can notice that you're dysregulated, there's something that you can do about it away. Here's what I call emergency measures to re-regulate. Now I've been collecting these and I've got some new ones for you. let me go over all of them. I've got 14. First, notice when you're dysregulated. Are you flooding with emotion? Do you feel filled with adrenaline? Are you panicking? Say to yourself, I'm having an emotional reaction. This is a good time to slow down and be gentle with yourself and other people that you don't say or do something that you'll regret later. Number two is be safe. Be safe. This is not a good time to drive a car. Pull over and take your time. If what triggered you was an argument, use gentle words to stop the interaction for now. I want to continue this conversation, but I need to take a breather to calm down. Or if you don't want to tell the other person that you're triggered, tell them that you need a bathroom break. Or if you're on the phone, you can say you have a call on the other line. Don't get into a big discussion about it while you're dysregulated. Just find a way to put the conversation on pause. Number three, buy some time. Separate from the other person if you can. Go to a room by yourself, even if it's the bathroom. No one has to know what you're doing. If it feels urgent to express yourself and get out there and argue, take an even longer break before you try to resolve anything. True emergencies are rare, and there are very few problems that can't be solved a little later when your emotions are regulated again. Number three. Don't be afraid to step back. Number four is stamp your feet. You would be amazed how helpful it is to bring yourself back into present time in your body as you stamp each foot. Say quietly to yourself, , left, , left. And this helps your brain begin to re-regulate. Number five. Take 10 deep breaths, focusing particularly on the out breath. Six. Press your tongue to the back of your teeth. This is a strategy to get back in your body too. Number seven. Sit down and feel the weight of your butt in the chair. that. This is another strategy to get back inside your body, which by the way is a metaphor. You are always in your body. But to feel that you're there, to be present, to feel your limbs, to occupy all the limbs of your body. All . Number eight. Stand up and shake it off. This is called somatic shaking. It's this. And you just kind of bounce up and down on your knees and let everything shake. And it can be funny. It can be relaxed. It can be silly if you want. You can swing your arms and just kind of enjoy the feeling of jiggling and shaking a hundred sticky little ping pong balls are falling off all around you. All . This one's kind of similar, but you can dance. A commenter told me about this and I was , I used to do that. And they said, when I was starting and I was extremely dysregulated, I would put music on really loud with headphones and then dance and jump. And shake my body. And I closed my eyes and I tried to feel what part of my body was tense and needs relief. And I would dance until I was exhausted and I couldn't do it anymore. And the person who wrote this comment said, I found this very helpful. And I just think that's one of the perfect forms of emergency measures to re-regulate. Very relaxing, very fun, very natural. All . Number 10. Eat something. When you're stressed, you'll probably crave carbs and sugar. But it's protein foods that will help you get grounded again. make sure you have some of those. Number 11. Wash your hands and feel the water and soap on your hands. Warm water is extra soothing, but also you can use ice water. You can use cold water, a cold shower if you . That can really give you a jolt. When you really need to pop out of a mood, a cold shower can just take you there. It sounds dreadful, ? But it's actually kind of nice. I read a book called, The Cold Shower, and it's really good. It's a great book. It's a great book. It's a great book. But it's also a great book for your face. I heard something recently. Somebody said, oh, women don't have to take cold showers. And I was , oh, thank goodness. But I kind of them sometimes. I prefer them in the summer, though. And you can wash your face with the water, even if you're just, , standing by the sink, get water on your face. I think we all naturally are inclined to do that. You can also make a bowl with water and ice and put your hands in the ice and feel the ice or get that ice water up on your face, too. These are strong methods to help bring you kind of back into present time, back into your senses and get your nervous system just to give it a little jolt that it needs to get back into reality. Number 13 is get a good squeezing hug. And if no one's around, you can press your back into a corner and wrap your arms around yourself that you can feel pressure all around your torso. And we're wired, actually, to calm down when we're hugged. , I'll never forget. There was this. I was watching HBO and it was about Temple Grandin. It was a it was a dramatization of her life. And she as a child used to sit in a swing with chains and then twist the swing around. I mean, who didn't do this and feel those chains kind of tighten along her sides? And she liked it. It was comforting to her. And I was , I remember that feeling. I don't know if it was comforting to me, but I love the part where then you tighten it up, you spin it as much as you can, pushing in the dirt with your feet and then you let your feet go. And you go that. Probably very regulating, actually. All . 14. And this is my favorite new technique. you go to a safe space, a safe space, and that's a room inside your car somewhere where you can close your eyes basically and not be in danger. And you imagine that you're watching a brilliant white light that's going around in a sideways figure eight, the infinity symbol. All . this. But you're picturing this with your eyes closed and you're allowing your eyes to follow the light. See? , here. that. I'm holding my face still and letting my eyes follow the imaginary light that I'm indicating with my fingertip. Now what's happening is my eyes are going, , they're moving and going back and forth, which is the movement within EMDR, which stands for eye movement desensitization, and reprocessing. . And this is important. Remember, the Ipsen example was asking, where did you want it? au h et, Mcassis. Remember that one? Here's the other one. My eyes are moving to the left along the ang tip. And theques in the left are going . And if you pull your eyes out, it will go left with the wasn't sttung. Same thing with Andres her marched from Niesen for 600 meters. It boosts the movies. and rate it on a scale of one to ten how bad is this feeling and then you do the exercise all you've rated the distressing thought and while you're thinking about it you do the exercise and you let your eyes follow the imaginary light with your eyes closed in a safe room or space and you're doing that and you do it for i don't know a minute or two and when you're done stop open your eyes and then ask yourself where am i now on the scale and the first time i ever tried it i thought about something distressing and i think i was at about eight i get distressed my work is really hard things happen i was really distressed about something and i was in an eight and i tried it and i was going around the circle and then when i was done i barely remembered to assess myself and where am i and i was oh gosh i don't know three from eight to three that's huge progress my distress level went down let's go back and i'll just show you one more but this is another one it's called out of the zone give it a try see if it works it's just plain and simple it's nothing magical and if it's only come down a little bit you're sort of your score that you give yourself do it again and each time you do it should get a little bit easier and then do it again and again until your distress comes down to zero and if it doesn't get better but instead gets worse stop and use a different technique i've just given you 13 other ones in this list that was the mdr you now have 14 emergency measures to help you get re-regulated on the spot. If you'd to get a handout of your own that lists all of these, you can have one for free. I've created it for you here, and I will see you very soon.