I have some tour dates to tell you about. I'll be in Vancouver, B.C. on September 14th, St. Louis, Missouri on April 19th, Halifax, Nova Scotia on August 11th. Get all your tickets at theovon.com slash T-O-U-R. And if tickets are too expensive, don't get them. Hold out. Don't let these Reapers get at you. We'll come back around sometime. Love you guys, and thank you for the support. , today's guest is a speaker, a counselor, and a researcher in the world of complex trauma. He has some amazing videos on YouTube. I really love how he discusses this world and his presentation of it. I'm grateful to spend time with him today via Windsor, Canada. He is here with us. Today's guest is Mr. Tim Fletcher. Shine that light on me. I'll sit and tell you my stories. Shine on me. And I will find a song. I've been singing all the time. Tim Fletcher, thanks for joining me, man. My pleasure. I've seen a lot of your videos on YouTube. A lot of it really resonates with me about trauma, childhood trauma, just a lot of things in that vein. I mean, you have many wonderful videos out there. And I'm just thankful you're here today to talk with us about it. I know we want to talk about trauma today and that sort of thing, but it's also a buzzword I feel people use a lot. And I don't want this to be a thing where we're just creating victims. what I'm saying? Kind of. . . I think lots in the last 10 years, this trauma has kind of come on the radar. Now everybody's talking about everybody's trauma informed and yet people really don't understand it a whole lot. But a lot of the response has been, no, I got somebody to blame. . And it's , no, we can explain now a lot of your behavior, but you got to now take responsibility to change that. . That's what, . And I don't want to create a lot of victims today. that's another point. That's another part. And I'm, this isn't a judgment against anybody. I'm just, this is even for myself. I've had a lot of problems. I'll get trapped in self-pity sometimes. I just, but you're saying, this is a great place for information. And, , how do we go about not creating victims? . to me, what trauma is, is pain happens to every child, but a child in a healthy home is able to get tools and support and they can resolve and grow through that. That. it's not trauma. It's pain that gets turned into growth. But what happens to a child that can't resolve it? Nobody's supporting them. Nobody's giving them tools to handle it. It turns into trauma. They're a victim. They're legitimate victim, a helpless victim who can't fix the problem. , and they are legitimate victims. The problem is, is that they still feel a victim as an adult, even though they're not a victim now, they now have tools and support and that's. One of the hardest transitions is to move from, I was a legit legitimate victim, but now I gotta take responsibility cuz I can. . And some don't wanna do that cuz they staying a victim cuz then I don't have to be responsible if people feel sorry for me, I can blame somebody. I don't have to grow up. . It's fascinating. . Let's talk about trauma. Let's talk about complex trauma. what is it? How would we say what it is? trauma is. Is the event happens on the outside, but I can't handle it. It's too painful. It's too scary for me. it creates this fear and stress that I don't have the tools to handle. . And as a result of that, since I can't fix it and resolve it, it then wounds me on the inside and that's the trauma is what takes place on the inside. What makes why we call it complex trauma. it's really mathematical terms. it's. There's simple math and there's complex math. simple is one number complex is more than one. simple trauma is a one event trauma, a car accident, a rape, whatever complex is ongoing danger. a child's in a situation where they're in ongoing danger. there's their stress system is constantly activated. do I fight flight? What do I do here? I gotta get out of here. I can't handle this. I can't handle this. that when a child lives in that environment. . All, all the time where they're constantly activated to fight flight. But if they're too little to fight or flight, then they eventually go, oh, I'm shutting her down. Freeze. I can't handle this. they, they go into this dissociative, , let's go into an internal world to protect herself and create a fantasy world because it's safe there. , and complex trauma is comes out of basically abuse or neglect. the. Two extreme ends of the spectrum. the abuse we can easily imagine that's physical abuse, emotional abuse, that's harsh environment, violence, et cetera. But a lot of complex trauma comes out of neglect. And that's the other end of the spectrum where all the physical needs of the child were met, but their emotional needs were met. the abuse trauma, something happens to you, neglect trauma, something didn't happen to you that should have happened. . And it's hard to find out those, the neglect trauma. Sometimes it's hard to locate some of it because it's almost feeling around for ghosts is what it feels . Exactly. . And that's where we spend a lot of time. what we've done with it is that we've broken down kind of the emotional needs that a child has. we have a need to be a, a child needs to be authentic and to connect with safe people and really be able to be vulnerable and open up and to be totally accepted for who they are, have somebody who totally gets them and hears them and. Sees them and values them and nurtures them. Those are all emotional needs. But if a child grows up in a home where I'm too busy for you or smarten up, get over it, toughen up, nobody's getting them. Nobody's hearing them. Or why can't you be your brother, et cetera. All of that is emotional trauma. That's hurting the child emotionally. the child's not feeling safe to be them. the child then has to adapt in order to try. To protect itself. I gotta be tougher. I can't be sensitive. I gotta wear this mask of being outgoing, et cetera. , but that's also how I'm gonna try to get my needs met. maybe if I'm different, then dad will give me more attention. Then mom won't be angry at me all the time. they're adapting, adapting, trying to get their needs met, trying to keep safe. And they don't even know who they are a lot of times. And that's what happens. They don't even really develop. They don't have a clue who they are after a while. Cause. They're busy trying to be something they're not to get acceptance and love. Cause they know if they're authentic. in a healthy situation of you're authentic, you connect in your love in complex trauma. If you're authentic, you get rejected. . And then you'll . Then you pull that authenticity back in, especially if you're really young, you don't even know. You're still net learning much about yourself or evolving who even knows what happens to. When you, when you, , redirect that river. That's supposed to be normal. It just becomes a, it's just damn floods everything. And it can get some real sewage going on. what happens when the child is neglected is the child basically thinks everything, it must be their fault. the reason dad's too busy must be because I'm not good enough reason. Mom's angry is I'm not good enough. they, they begin to develop this core self identity that something's wrong with me. I'm not good enough. I have to change. and be somebody else in order to get acceptance and love. Why does a child develop, why does a child, because the world revolves around them when they're a child. They only know themselves, and they have no one else to blame if something is wrong in the world? we refer to it, the child brain is basically, what's developed is the limbic brain, which is the emotional center, the cortex hasn't developed yet. And it's called egocentric thinking. everything they see through their eyes that affects them, they caused it, everything is related to them somehow. if dad's too busy or mom and dad get a divorce, I must have done something wrong, it must be my fault. If I get sexually abused, I must have brought it on. everything is an egocentric way of thinking. I see, because they're really the only player on the court, kind of. Exactly, exactly. And then what happens, though, with that is they make adjustments, hoping to get love and acceptance and get their needs met and stay safe, but something way back here now goes, you're phony. they get the imposter syndrome, which says, you're getting love and acceptance, but if they knew the real you, they wouldn't be giving you that love and acceptance, because you're an imposter. the solution hasn't fixed the problem. It's still unresolved. that's where complex trauma then, it's still not fixed, I'm still in fight or flight. I've got to come up with a new persona. I've got to come up with, a new mechanism to try and get my needs met, but I never can find a solution that totally satisfies. it's more than one trauma that happens to a child, ? And they don't have somebody there to help them process it. Can children have different levels of trauma or no trauma if they have somebody there to help them process it? . there's degrees of trauma, some very severe to very mild. And the latest, the latest studies and Gabor Mat in his book, The Myth of Normal, has published them to say about 75 of Americans have this subtle complex trauma. And basically it's a child that, if a child is always being made teased by parents or ignored by parents, dad's always busy, dad's in this chair next to him, but he's always watching TV. he's physically there, but he's not, he's not there emotionally. The child just doesn't feel loved and accepted. they, they don't feel safe. They don't feel they can totally relax. They have to somehow earn that connection, earn that love. And a child has this inner trauma taking place that's happening. That's subtle, but it's powerful and it's really major upheaval internally that's taking place inside the child. It's forming how they're going to behave. , exactly. now they're going to start these behaviors to try to get attention, to try to get connection. But is some of that natural too? , because a child, and that's, it's built off very natural things. the child has a natural personality, they can be naturally funny, but then they can take that to just, I got to be funny all the time. They can be naturally very, a child, every child wants to please and love, but now I'm going to be a hero. I'm going to get straight A's, I'm going to do all the chores. I'm going to be a workaholic because that's how I'll get validation and acceptance. Got it. you were just talking about, isn't some of that natural for a child? that, that being wanting to help with the chores, that's a wonderful instinct that a child has, but now they're going to turn that into a maladaptation. now I'm going to be a people pleaser. I got to, or I'm going to be a perfectionist. Everything's got to be perfect. They're going to please never say no to anybody just, but then I'm going to burn myself out. I'm never, and I'm going to kill myself. that adaptation. You don't mean kill, you just mean burn yourself out. . . , that adaptation pleasing people and all of that has become a maladaptation. It's now hurting me. I see. a lot of children with complex trauma have maladaptations. They all do. They all do. . . . And what are some symptoms of complex trauma that you can see in people? , very common ones is that they don't know who they are because they've had to wear masks all their life and they become people pleasers. Most have anger issues. Most have authority issues because all the authorities of their life have not been healthy. , most have some control manipulation issues that are part of that. , lot have lying issues. They lie when it would just as be is just as easy. To tell the truth. But lying is what they had to do to kind of stay safe. , because truth got them in trouble. , there's a fear of failure, a fear of change, a fear even of success because it's , oh, everything's going too good. The other shoe is going to drop. Something bad is going to happen. now I better sabotage it. Wow. there's lots. It's a fear driven thing. The fear of rejection. There's a desire. There's a fear for intimacy, but a fear of intimacy because then you're going to get to know me. Then you're going to reject me. Deep fear of abandonment that anybody that gets to know me leaves me. , and that you can see all of that becomes problematic and relationship stuff and then trust issues. Oh God, Tim, you're a man. A lot. I can. I can. , I can relate to a lot of those things. , I can relate not to be careful when I see when I think about because at certain points in my life I've had a lot. I've had those things and , , but I have to be careful that I don't immediately attach it to being a victim. Even when I'm thinking about it now, I don't want to be , , some of those things I've had in my life, man, what a piece of shit I am, ? Because that's what will happen sometimes for me. , and if I can interrupt. , no, please. what I would say is the core, , the worst result that comes out of complex trauma is how it changes your self identity. a child that's loved and accepted is a positive self identity. I have value. I, I have something to offer to the world. A child with complex trauma that's felt neglected. It's my fault. I must not be good enough. They have a negative self identity. , and, and because of that, I am a piece of shit. No, whoever would want to get to know me. , and I need to hide who I really am. that core identity just affects every decision they make, every relationship response that they have. And that's probably the most hidden part of complex trauma. The hardest thing for people to see because who understands shame? What's shame? What's that? But once you understand it, it's , whoa, that changes everything. . And that's where the healing really has to, take place. Man. It's funny. You say some of this, I there'll be times where, , , if, , a lot of times I'll take it to relationships. If a girl rejected me or wouldn't look at me, , man, , it would attach itself to a place in me almost a, , a thought get got into a Ferris wheel. And I don't even know the Ferris wheel was going, but this thought got into the Ferris wheel. a person getting into a little Ferris wheel compartment. , and the Ferris wheel was just , you are just, , you are horrible. Yes, you are. And it just, and it, it was just feeding this old thing, but it would, it was crazy how quick it would go from maybe if I'd asked a girl to a dance, or even if I just had some interest in my head, but she never looked at me or something. And I would immediately be , God, man, you must just have, you must just be gross. is that crazy to say that to you? Not at all. Cause shame, one of the most powerful aspects of shame is that it creates this inner critic in our brain. That's caught no matter what we do, it criticizes it, it finds fault with it. And if we fail, especially it just beats us up. And we're in the doghouse for weeks, it's just flogging us. , and it's just loud and it is brutal there. . , it would be everything. You're poor, your body's gross. You're ugly, you're stupid. You're ugly. You're stupid. Nobody, everybody want you. You're never amount to anything. You're a failure. I mean, it was a machine gun. Yes. , and the craziest part was now I have a little bit more rev, I'm able to see it more, but man, for 30 years of my life, I couldn't even see it. Yes. And that's, what happens? Complex trauma for most people begins from birth. . And it's pre-memory time, pre-verbal time. And a lot of the stuff that's happening in their brain is all happening subconsciously. They're, they're not thinking about it. They're not, they're, they're an infant. . It's, it's, it's all subconscious. your whole subconscious brain. Is forming. Is forming with all this negative stuff. , and that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, that's, and that's a real tragedy of complex trauma. Is it shaping the brain in the infant years with negative messages, lies, negative perceptions that you're not even aware of there. You just think are normal. And those can be a parent not looking at its child. Exactly. And not interacting. Exactly. There's probably countless things that could create trauma at that age, ? Exactly. what we know is a child, needs to feel safe. They need lots of hugs and touches. They need eye contact. That's how they learn to regulate. That's how they learn to feel and experience emotions by picking up on the parents emotions. That's how their emotions get calmed by looking into somebody who's calm. , but if they don't have that, then it's , it's me against the big bad world. And I'm only one week old. it's, it's too overwhelming. It's too scary. . You got to be a gangster suddenly. . And you're only seven days old. Exactly. And you can't even carry a gun. Exactly. Exactly. And that's a lot of pressure. , imagine the pressure that a kid starts to feel a child starts to feel. And that's why I say that's your stress system is activated. And that's what we mean. That's complex trauma. that makes sense as to why, if certain things will happen in adulthood, it'll immediately cause stresses in me, even if it's just normal. I'd have a lot of instances where even in intimacy situations with women, somebody would touch me and it would make me, I would feel, , I'd feel overwhelmed. Yes. , I would feel, , , it was just crazy. It was just, I don't know. It was. And then I felt bad about myself. Yes. Because again, the second something was a little bit off. Yes. It would get into that back onto that Ferris wheel of man. Yes. You don't must be something really wrong with you. Yes. ? . Life can be crazy. Sometimes one person's negligence or company's negligence can result in another's settlement. If you've been injured, you can check out America's largest injury law firm, Morgan and Morgan. They have over 100 offices nationwide and more than 1000 lawyers. With over 20 billion recovered for over 500,000 clients, Morgan and Morgan has a proven track record of fighting to get you full and fair compensation. Winning a gold medal is hectic, I bet, but submitting an injury claim with Morgan and Morgan is easy. If you're ever injured, you can check out Morgan and Morgan. Their fee is free unless they win. For more information, go to for the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, beforethepeople.com slash thispastweekend or dial pound law from your cell phone. That's forthepeople.com slash thispastweekend or pound law, pound 529 from your cell. This is a paid advertisement. If you riding your bike in the evening or catching you a couple of lightning bugs, or looking at them Daisy Dukes on the neighbor's wife, then you're me. And summertime is your season. That means you're going to need a little bit of liquid IV to help keep you hydrated while you do your peeping time. And a single stick of liquid IV makes ordinary hydration extraordinary with three times the electrolytes of the leading sports drink, plus eight vitamins and nutrients for everyday wellness. Liquid IV. That's the best thing you can do. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing. It's a great thing people to drink. Liquid IV gets it done. You simply tear open the package, pour it into some water, circle it up with a spoon and bam. Background surround. It's a great thing for a starts. Liquid IV just quenches you out. They've got beautiful flavors in there. Pear, Sugar-free White Peach, Sugar-free Green Grape, Strawberry, Lemonade, Lemon-lime, Et Cetera. after every show. It's satisfying. Makes me feel I'm just gulping something good. Turn your ordinary water into extraordinary hydration with Liquid IV. Get 20 off your first order of Liquid IV when you go to liquidiv.com and use code Theo at checkout. That's 20 off your first order when you shop better hydration today using promo code Theo at liquidiv.com. , can I just share, , some science stuff here? . I think it's really helpful to understand trauma. , you really need to understand our central nervous system. And it's really made up of two parts. there's the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic. the sympathetic is your work energy. , it gives you the energy to fight or flight, to work hard, get up in the morning, go, go, go. But then you need a parasympathetic, a balancing part. That's your rest, healing, restoration piece. a child has to have that in balance to be healthy, to grow. But what happens in complex trauma when you're in danger all the time is you're in your sympathetic all the time. Because you got to be on guard. You got to be going. You got to get validation. You got to prove yourself. You got to work. You got to earn. you got to go, go, go. You're driven. And, and the brain helps you with that. It releases cortisol when fear is in your stress system activated, and that releases adrenaline. you can go on adrenaline. That gives you lots of energy. And you feel, hey, I can pull this off. And if you're young, you've got the resources to do that. But the problem is you're not engaging your parasympathetic. mesmo Edit Sentimental Fase. and usually around 30 or , it catches up with you. And all of a sudden your body says, coworkers, says i'm not doing this anymore you're burning me out here and i'm going to start shutting down and one of the first things it does to help engage the parasympathetic is to bring on depression because depression brings in the parasympathetic and it forces you to slow down it forces you to shut down wow and then for some they keep pushing they keep pushing and some go to drugs because drugs will give you the energy to keep going and they keep then your body actually just burns itself out and shuts itself down then you have a total not just an emotional burnout you have a physical burnout wow your body can create depression in order to give the parasympathetic because then you're at least going to slow down you're going to exactly even if there's these other side effects of how you feel about it exactly what happens to a little child is how do they learn the parasympathetic they we call a co-regulator mom or dad is regulated emotionally as calm they're in their parasympathetic they look them in the eyes and they regulate their own nervous system to mom and dad but if mom and dad are absent or mom and dad are angry all the time your regulator's not there or they're regulated they're triggering you and keeping you full of fear and anxiety wow it's it's messing you up or if you have parents that just are work work if you relax you're lazy if you relax you're selfish they're they're forcing you by this work ethic to be out of balance and actually it's creating very subtle complex trauma because you're just a workaholic and you feed off it and you're driven but what happens is that's normal then you're creating a normal that is extremely abnormal exactly man i just to have some part my mother didn't look at me when i was a child i don't remember i don't and i don't say that i don't need sympathy or anything i'm just saying that as an adult recognizing that this child wasn't looked at in the eyes i'm glad i exist and but she if there were an emotional thing she couldn't connect she almost had an emotional autism yes if i were physical if i got hurt she could help the second i got hurt but if i'm sitting across from her feeling a certain way yes it doesn't even it's there's there's she can't she didn't come to me she can't i don't know how to describe it that was the most passion i've ever had in my life she can't come to me she would hug she couldn't hug me for more than half a second and i'm not saying that as a whiny baby i'm just i'm trying to relate to some of the stuff you're talking about one of the things that happened was i noticed as i got older i didn't know how long and my father was a senior citizen and he was really absent i didn't know how long to look into somebody's eyes i remember i'd have this weird stuff sometimes where i would check in with somebody's eyes but then look away while i was explaining myself man yes makes me feel bad for myself not it doesn't make me feel bad as an adult but it makes me feel bad yes that kid had to do that can i speak scientifically to that again you're the first response to danger is the brain releases cortisol which is adrenaline and that gives you the energy to fight or flight you get you can fight harder you can run faster because you got adrenaline happening but if you're too little to fight or flight then that's cortisol is not doing you any good and if your parents are punishing you for being angry etc the brain then switches and produces opioids natural opioids and it says we're going to shut down and what happens with that is that you dissociate you move inward and all the blood comes from the muscles around the heart because it's basically saying we're going to get ready to get hurt we're going to get ready to get cut we don't bleed as much we're going to put all the blood around here that if we get hurt out here cut out here nothing is we're not going to bleed as much really your body does that no way your body's now gone to that fight or flight don't work now we're going to freeze and then what some kids learn in freeze is but i still need my needs met now i learned to fawn i will learn to say whatever you want me to say be whatever you want me to be just don't hurt me just put up with me wow that's your four f's that develop but what we have what happens what are they against we know them fight flight freeze and fawn wow but what has happened is fight or flight you're basically your emotions are out there freeze your emotions go in you shut them down and most people with complex trauma don't do with emotions they shut down emotions they don't even know they have emotions and what we say is that most complex trauma families they have three emotions mad sad and glad dad can be mad mom can be sad but the kids got to be sad be glad man i remember i would i ask people how do i feel about this which is crazy man i know it's not some of this i know sounds maybe crazy to some people but i remember i just didn't even have any i didn't know how i felt about anything i just knew how you felt yes and how i needed a scene yes and what happens to a child who's fawning is i'm more to how you're feeling than to how i'm feeling oh i was falling i was a damn bambi babe what i'm saying i was a bambi in memphis i know your emotions better than my own i know what you think and believe more than what i think because that's how i need to survive is i need to be more attuned to you than i am to me for me i noticed for a long time i didn't know what was going on and for me i found out back in the early part of the caffeine it used to during the second Dndi of eating the value of been a way to say I had been From now on I didn't know what was hanging me down I didn't know what failure ma had never what research said i didn't know what inspiration and what monument forum think about focusing on the definition of becoming me going to recovery programs and the 12 step and that helped me for the first time have a little bit of a clue i heard people share stuff that things i could never put into words i mean that was one of the I was , I was stuck to me. I couldn't see me at all. , and some ways that things that were having a tough time in my life, huge problems trusting people. Didn't trust huge problems with that. One thing I noticed really recently, still unrealistic expectations of myself and other people. And I've always had them. , it's and I realize that it's I think some of it is . I want to make it if I have unrealistic expectations of myself, then I'm never going to be able to achieve them. The bar is too high. . And then I'll always be what I thought. I always was anyway. Which was not enough. that's where shame creates a self-fulfilling prophecy. . that's this. That's why I now I'm able to see that a little. But before I was just stuck on that Ferris wheel. . , and I still it still happens that's a tough one recently for me. Oh, self-pity. That was a huge one. That was my biggest drug in life that I never realized. Was. Self-pity. And I reframed it for myself. I was , oh, if I just keep trying, I'll get everything. I have to work harder. I have to be better. I can't go do something fun with my friends. I need to stay and write a book or it was just an unreal these unrealistic expectations. But I was always keeping myself in a place of self-pity without realizing it because that was a side effect of having unrealistic expectations. And man, that self-pity was. But it looked . On the outside, I was trying to better myself. it was. I was always. Does it make any sense to you? can I ask you with that? Because what you're describing is very common in the world I work in. a lot would say unrealistic expectations. you're always setting the bar too hard, hard, high for yourself, which is always leading to failure, which is self-pity as the aftermath. But what you're thinking is, but I'm trying, I'm trying, I'm trying. But what's happening often with the self-pity. And here's my question is there's this growing sense of helplessness and hopelessness. Did you go through that? Or was there always, I can somehow rise above if I just dig a little deeper. That was me. . And that's what I was talking about with the sympathetic nervous system. I'm getting tired. I'm starting to burn out. But if I dig a little deeper, I can push, I can push, I can keep going until you eventually do. Burn out. . That's where societal, the society affected me because there was always that you have to grind harder. Yes. The 70 minute work week or something or , , the four minute relationship. There's all these books. I'm , what is unrealistic, man? , the 52nd life. And you're that. Why would I want to do that? Exactly. , and that's where society even pushed me even further. And about four years ago I had a breakdown. It was , , I was burned out. I couldn't even listen to somebody talk because there was no, yes, you can't concentrate. And it made me, , it physically exhausted me to listen to somebody in a conversation. , and I kept working. Yes. There's an episode of this podcast where I, I felt it was just man. And this, the fact that I, then I start to feel bad that I treated myself that way, ? , anyway, can I share a little bit from me? , please, man. I, I got it. I got into this work over 20 years ago, but that was after seven years of burnout. Wow. I had worked for, , till I was 32 and all of a sudden I was just tired all the time. I couldn't sleep. I was just, and my eyes were getting , my wife would go, something's wrong with you. Your eyes are really looking weird. . You're looking big. You're about to eat a fly. They get dark and this and, , and then went. I went to doctor after doctor and eventually put me on disability, but I went through seven years of depression and hell and anxiety. And, , and when I came to the end of what the government would give me for disability, I had to go back to work. I just worked on farms. I milked cows. I took care of horses. Oh . And that was very healing for me. That was very therapeutic. But then, , , lady, I knew. She came to me and said, Tim, we really need help with this treatment center. And I think you'd be the perfect counselor. And that cow's out of milk. And I said, I said, I think you got the wrong guy. I can't go back to that world. And she's, she came back about three months later and she said, Tim, I think you're the guy. Please give it some thought. And I said, , I'll go for the interview. , but when I went for the interview and I said, I'm going to go to the hospital. I said, , I'll give it a try for three months. But I told myself, if you don't make some major changes in how you go about working, you're not going to make it. you got to radically change your boundaries in life and people pleasing and all of that. But the first week as I was working with these people with trauma and addiction, I was , this is what I was made for. Wow. These are my people. And I fell in love with it, but it came after all of, all of my work came after seven years of hell burnout that I brought on myself because of my trauma. But you didn't know it though, ? No, I thought I was doing the thing by pushing myself. I was being a responsible father and husband. And I had a four year old, a three year old and a one year old. Oh, wow. you guys were really. And. Making love on the solstice. And all of a sudden their dad just was sick and in bed all the time. And they basically all went through abandonment trauma because their dad disappeared from their life for seven years. And were you using drugs? Did you use pills and stuff? You didn't. You were just depressed. . Wow. , one of the toughest things I found when I had, when I was struggling was when I was physically struggling, ? I had gotten depleted. . That. That. All the doctors I would go to, they couldn't really diagnose it. , they would take my blood. Chronic fatigue syndrome. . And you're looking up all these crazy things. And then you're wearing, , at one point I was just , I had on one of those, I'd bought a posture organizer from the thing. And I just had a couple, some shake weights and some, some weighted anklets on and people are , what are you doing? And I'm , they say this works, , . Try the bracelet. Oh, everything. Oh, my whoop bracelet. just people bring me little mason jars of their home concoctions and one of the toughest places for me too was it was relationships and it still is it still is a really tough space for me it's that also goes to unrealistic expectations i don't if things get tough i'll leave i i heard you talk about fake intimacy once do what i'm talking about what were you talking about it i resonated with that every child longs for connection just built but if you can't get it you try to connect with dad but he's always too busy mom's always depressed or angry you can't connect you assume it's my fault i must be something wrong with me but i'm still driven for connection but i don't want deep genuine connection now because that's always led to rejection let's try bar room intimacy let's try fake intimacy let's just have fun all the time and sport pervert yes pornography that sort of thing because it gives the feelings of connection without the truth of the story and the truth of the story and the truth of the story and the truth of the story and the truth of the story and the truth of the story and the truth of the story intimacy but it doesn't satisfy no but and it sets up addiction and that's where most people end up sadly straying into that fake intimacy world would you do you think it's safe to say that complex trauma makes having a healthy relationship impa it's got to have a huge effect yes very much and impossible even no makes it almost impossible for a healthy relationship everybody that i deal with as long as they're single they don't think they need to work on their trauma because just me i'm i'm surviving as soon as they get in a relationship then they start damaging the other person then they have kids they're damaging their kids and all of a sudden they go i gotta start working on my crap but then they go i'll just change this i'll change this but it's not working why is it not fixing the relationship and it's because you're trying to fix the symptoms you're not dealing with the root issues that deep shame that deep lack of trust that deep fear of intimacy and fear of abandonment and as long as those are still there they're going to keep getting in the way of true healthy relationships and a lot of people have that fear and fear of abandonment and as long as they're in the way of true healthy relationships and a lot of people As long as the relationship's going along smoothly, it looks pretty good. But as soon as there's the slightest thing that triggers their fear of abandonment or triggers their shame, big explosion. They go back to old behaviors. All of a sudden they're in fight, flight, or freeze mode. They're lashing out. They're running away. And that's when all the damage happens. And after a while, there's much baggage from all the damage that you just can't repair it. . . . I mean, personally, I would. , I've had problems. I mean, certainly problems with not cheating in relationships. I've always. I think I've cheated in every relationship I've ever been in, sadly. , let me think. Oh, would have problems with sex and stuff. But if the person was going to leave me, then I could have. It was my body. They would then entertain it, . But otherwise, . . Or if it was with a stranger, it was easier, . Not a complete stranger, somebody at a mall or something. But , , with somebody, , a bar sex or somebody that or just somebody you met at a service area or whatever. But , that kind of stuff. Oh, staying with somebody. Man, this is this is this staying with somebody. Because I didn't want them to have somebody else who would really care about them. Yes. Or that could care about them better than me. . Even though I knew I was doing a bad job. . And it makes me feel. I'm not proud of that. And I didn't know. But some a lot of it, man, I didn't know until later. , I just. Couldn't see it. . But , stuff that. Oh, thinking that my partner, a woman, my girlfriend or whatever, if they did something wrong, then it was me doing it wrong. Yes. . . Oh, gosh. If they if they're a little off or something or they do things a way that people don't , that's a reflection of me. Totally. Yes. , those are some symptoms that I had, . Can I talk scientifically? 100 percent. You can talk in any. Ask anyone about it. to me, it's interesting, especially living in the West, is much of our dating and attraction in relationships is really what we've come to understand is the limbic or the emotion part of the brain and the chemical oxytocin, which is what makes me feel in love. And that's released through when I see somebody pretty, when I touch them, when I kiss them, when I have a good time. When I have sex, all of that releases those feel good chemicals and I feel in love. I feel it's going to last forever. I feel intimacy, though it's not true intimacy. It's the feeling of intimacy. that's a great starting place for a relationship. The problem is you can't sustain that just through sex, just because you still got life. You got to communicate. You got to learn to accept and love and respect each other. But. If you've never been taught how to do that, you don't. you just keep trying to have sex, keep trying to have fun, but the feelings are dying. It's not releasing the same oxytocin. And the relationship is designed to start there, but it's designed then to move to the cortex, which is the thinking part of the brain, which then releases all of the serotonin that comes through safety, through connection, through acceptance. Wow. And that's through building a life. Working through issues, resolving problems, really respecting, trusting each other. That takes a lot of work. That takes time. And most people from complex trauma are scared to death to go there. the sex is just that intimate connection up top is just a fuse kind of. Exactly. And then the other part is a fire. Exactly. , man, I just. . And but most try it with complex trauma. I just think I can live up here on the fuse. , I'm a fuse monkey. I'm up here. . And that's going to be great. It just never satisfied. , never. And then it's , I just. And then the second piece to me is what comes out of complex trauma? Are you familiar with the term gaslighting? , but what does it mean? I always hear people say it, but I'm just too bored or just too lazy to look it up, I think. if dad is angry instead of him being honest and saying, I'm sorry, I'm having a bad day, you didn't do anything wrong. It's all on me. He goes, you're a bad kid. It's all your fault. That's gaslighting. He's twisting it and making you believe a lie. And what happens in complex trauma is constant gaslighting of a child that whenever any parent or authority is having a bad emotion, the child is made to feel it's their responsibility to fix that emotion. No, it's not. They can't fix their dad's anger. Only dad can fix his own anger. But they're made to feel if they just did more chores, if they weren't making noise, if they were more agreeable, more obedient, then dad would never get angry. But dad always gets angry. But you keep believing the gaslighting lie. . now when you go into relationships, as soon as your spouse is a little bit sad, what did I do wrong? Maybe I should do something here. Maybe I should do this. You still take responsibility for everybody else's emotions. And that sets up relationships to be codified. . And that sets up relationships to be codified. . I think I Äì there was a point I was , , I have to be perfect. Yes. , I was if I'm perfect, , if I'm absolutely perfect somehow, then there's no way I won't get what I need as a child because even in the laws of the universe, that wouldn't make any Äì , it would feel that wouldn't make any sense. can I ask you a question? . what happens often with a child is they go to that perfectionism where I set the bar too high for myself that I can be perfect. I will have no limitations. I'll do everything perfectly the first time. But it also can create a fantasy world where I'm going to be a superman. I'm going to do everything wonderfully. I'm going to save everybody. did you have that fantasy thinking begin to develop in you? No. Not that much. I think when this podcast started getting busier and you have a lot of young guys who are the same Äì who had a lot of the same thoughts and feelings that I did about stuff would reach out as if I knew more than them really. When I really didn't, I was just kind of Äì just have been kind of a late bloomer, , and just learning in front of people I guess because I've talked about more stuff that over the years. And then that for a little bit gave me a fear of , Äì . Do I have some greater responsibility? is God thinking I need you to help? there was moments of not grandeur but questions of I could easily see that thing start to get in, , of , oh, then I must know everything, . It didn't sprout in me but I could Äì there were times where I Äì shit, even when that started to happen, I was I Äì I would be offended. I was a failure at that. there was Äì thankfully at that point, there was some of that Ferris wheel that brought me back down to the shit carnival, . But there was some of that kind of Äì none of it as a child. if I'm Äì I just set out on my own. I remember thinking I'm never going to let anything define me in this whole world except for me. . You never Äì and I mean even when I say it now, I can feel Äì I mean I can Äì . I can fucking feel it in my Äì no one is ever going to define me again. . You are not going to have a say in how I feel. . And it comes Äì dude, it comes from a place that's deep in me. . I can't even Äì . I can barely Äì sometimes I can Äì it's the weather changes just enough where I can see into the window of it a little bit. But the Äì whatever it is, the climate adjusts quick again. . Can I speak to that just for a minute? Because part of my concern has been a very popular term these days is ODD or oppositional defiance disorder. kids are getting diagnosed with ODD all the time. And it's really been pathologized it's a bad thing. You've been Äì you're a bad kid because you've got ODD. And what you're describing in yourself to me is ODD. I'm never going to let anybody define me again. That's oppositional defiance. But really it starts Äì It starts out in complex trauma. And it's a healthy thing. And it's a child who's Äì nobody's accepting me. Everybody's trying to make me something I'm not. Everybody's trying to control me. Everybody's Äì I got this rigid rules, all of this harsh discipline, et cetera. That's not . That's wrong. That's hurting me. I need to be able to have some freedom. I need to be able to be myself. And we rebel against what's unhealthy. But people don't see that we're doing something healthy. They just say, you're rebelling. And they pathologize it. Oh, I see. . If you're a rebel when you're young, they're , oh, look at this rebel. Exactly. But for you, you're trying to figure it out for yourself. You're trying to fix what's wrong. . And make it . You're not trying to be a rebel. You're trying to develop something loving and healthy. But what happens for most kids is then they gain Äì that just gets into their soul. And now, even if somebody wants what's best for me, I'm not going to let anybody define me. now I'm going to rebel against good and bad. And that then becomes a maladaptation. . . A lot of those old safety Äì a lot of those old survival techniques become Äì it tips over the other side of the seesaw. . . Quick. Quick math. The less your business spends on operations, on multiple systems, on delivering your product or service, the more margin you have and the more money you get to keep. to reduce costs and headaches, smart businesses are graduating to NetSuite by Oracle. NetSuite is the number one cloud financial system, bringing accounting, financial management, inventory, HR into one platform and one source of truth. With NetSuite, you reduce IT costs because NetSuite lives in the cloud with no hardware required accessed from anywhere. You cut the cost of maintaining multiple systems because you've got one unified business management suite. It seems everything is more expensive these days. you'd be wise to find proven ways to cut costs and boost performance at the same time. NetSuite can help. By popular demand. NetSuite has extended its one-of-a-kind flexible financing program for a few more weeks. Head to NetSuite.com slash T-H-E-O. That's NetSuite, N-E-T-S-U-I-T-E dot com slash Theo. NetSuite.com slash Theo. Call them what you want, baby. Knee knockers, golden nuggets, thigh slappers, etc. But our friends at Manscaped refer to them. As the boys. Talking about your body, baby. You're nuts. Not every man has children, but every man is responsible for their two baby boys below the waist, baby. Them wiener nuggets, homie. When your little guys have more hair than they need, trust Manscaped for all your grooming dreams. Boys need love, too. join the 10 million men worldwide who trust Manscaped by going to Manscaped.com and use code. Theo for 20 off and free shipping. You heard it here first. The boys are back in town and looking to smoke some cigarettes. That's . Manscaped has the products to de-hair your nuggets, baby. Un-hair your nuts, baby. Trim them baby randles, son. That freaking wiener mistletoe, dog. You heard me, you nuts. Get 20 off and free shipping with the code Theo at Manscaped.com. That's 20 off and free shipping with code Theo at Manscaped.com. For the best your boys have ever looked, trust Manscaped. It's time to get ready for the sunny season ahead with quality shades that are built to last from Shady Rays. Shady Rays has you covered with premium polarized sunglasses that won't break the bank. Shady Rays is an independent company. Offering a world-class product. Rated five stars by over 300,000 people. Their shades have durable frames and crystal clear optics. Making them the perfect choice. I love my Shady Rays. I sport them during episodes. And I sport them just during regular life if I'm looking at somebody outside. You can as . If you don't love your shades, exchange for a new pair or return worry-free within 30 days. There's no risk. When you shop, their team always has your back with personal and fast support. Exclusively for our listeners, Shady Rays is giving out their best deal of the season. Head to ShadyRays.com and use code Theo for 20 off each pair of polarized sunglasses. Try for yourself the shades rated five stars by over 300,000 people. , and a lot of this, I don't want to get into that self-pity place again. , I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to do that. A lot of it is just looking. I'm trying to look at some of this stuff with you, , because it's interesting. And it's amazing how it still comes to the surface because a lot of it I haven't resolved. I think I've taken care of some of the stuff and I have a much better understanding of a lot of it now. And I'm able to see. I'm able to see what's going on a lot of times. But some of it is still unresolved for me. let's go. Let's go into the just kind of the very basics of healing. , . No, I think that's good. , I don't want to be we've had some of the experience. We've had some of that. , , I want to get into a part of, , how does one locate their complex trauma they can begin to heal it if it's possible? . And that's the huge challenge is that much of it exists in the subconscious mind. we're not even aware of all of it. We're not aware of these mechanisms and kind of subconscious brain templates and programs that have been operating our life. It's almost we're in autopilot. And because it's been normal for us all our life, we don't see it as being abnormal or unhealthy. And that's where taking a program or watching videos where you begin to grow in self-awareness, to understand trauma, to understand the different characteristics of trauma. we talk about 60 different. The patterns in your emotions, the patterns in your thinking, the patterns in your behavior, in your relationships. And once you begin to grow in self-awareness, then you go, oh, wow, , now I'm starting to see it. But then that goes, , now I know what unhealthy is. Now I can define it. What's healthy? I don't know what healthy. And that's where we talk about healing from complex trauma requires reparenting. You need surrogate family. That can begin to model healthy for you, teach you healthy, and begin to help you learn healthy. But that requires the third piece, and that is connection. And that's the thing I fear the most. If people get to really know me, they're going to reject me. But what I've been craving all my life is true connection with safe people. And trauma requires safe people to heal. It's got an academic element of self-awareness. But it's got a. It's got a connection reparenting element as . , I. It's hard to notice. , I would just think I was bad at relationships for a long time. I would just think that. , and I was. I mean, I was just think that I was a philandering man, , kind of deal gypsy, whatever it is. I don't even know what they call it. Gypsy boy or whatever. And then. But , I was , and I still don't know how I'm going to do it. , if I think about being in a marriage a long term, I don't know how I could do it. , I mean, I know for a while I resorted to pornography for a while. And but that lost it. , , I just learned through other 12 step just how negative it is for you. And that's not a solution. I mean, I still date and everything. But I don't know if when I think about that. It's , oh, that feels harrowing. . But it used to be if I saw a family that was functioning, I was , what the fuck is this? This is fucking the dumbest thing I've ever seen. That's where I started at. Yes. And that's exactly. That's a real thing. . And to even get to the point now where I can even think about being in a marriage or something for me. That's it's been a while. , it's been a it's been it's been a ride. . , and that to me is a common defense mechanism of people with lots of trauma and shame is I need to disparage anything that's healthy. . What the fuck are you doing? Who are you? Who do you think you are? And it's I got to look down on everybody to feel better about myself, even if I know I should be aspiring to what they're they've got. Man. And it hurts people much when they're behaving that way, too. That's the toughest part. Is man. How you hurt yourself. . to me, what I say with complex trauma is others wounded me when as a child I develop malaptations. The longer I hang on to them, the more I just wound myself. I don't need anybody to wound me anymore because I just do a great job myself. . And I keep the Ferris wheel going. You have a program react. It's . Is that it react? it stands for recovery education for addiction. And complex trauma. . what we found was that 97 of addicts have complex trauma. I see. this a lot of this is addiction focus. Originally. And I started in the addiction world and we were the only treatment center in Canada that saw addiction as a symptom of deeper problems. And the lady that trained me said, Tim, your job is to find those problems. And complex trauma. And complex trauma wasn't even on the radar. Then it was called adult children of alcoholics, whatever adult children of dysfunction. Then it became known as developmental trauma disorder. . Then excuse me, then complex trauma came in on the radar. But basically what it's saying is that we always see addiction as a problem, but to an addict, it was the solution to their problems. , and until we begin to realize what problem are they trying to solve? to drugs and alcohol. That deep loneliness, the deep pain, the deep emptiness, that deep longing to feel connected, all of those drugs seem to solve that for them. And we can't really help people with addiction by just working on the symptoms. We got to get to that root issue. I was in part of Canada where all the treatment centers were talking about trauma, and we got to be trauma-informed. And I asked them, is anybody willing to change their program? And none of them were. And I had started, some addicts asked me to start a Friday night thing where I'd started teaching this stuff. that's where these videos started. I started 17 years ago teaching around what I was learning and started with 50 addicts coming out, and it grew and grew and grew. , your channel's fascinating, man. . And - what came out of that was when there were 10 treatment centers, nobody would change their program. Wow. Though they all said they needed to start dealing with the trauma. I said, , I guess I got to start. And I didn't want to start a treatment center, but I did. REACT started as a treatment center for addiction and complex trauma. And it spread to three different locations in Canada. But then COVID hit. It hit. And we put it online. And then once people heard, and we called it LIFT, just to give it a different name because it was online. And once people heard about it, now we have people from over 30 different countries that are- that was a blessing, huh? . And now thousands are taking LIFT. And it's much more intense. It's a 15-week program. But you get a different- . It's a different kind of program. . And we're trying to get people to take a deep dive into understanding trauma and then learning what a healthy life looks and connecting with a group of people in the journey. Wow. That's incredible, man. in the days when treatment centers just basically worked on symptoms, relapse warning signs, triggers, people, places, and things, HALT, all of the- , hungry, angry, lonely, tired. . All of those different things, what they began to- what they saw was their symptoms. . And their success rate was less than 10. Wow. Once we started REACT and we've kept statistics, our success rate is over 50. Let's go. Tim, that's great. . Because you're dealing with helping people deal with that core stuff that's been the issue. . , one of the reasons that I loved being in AA, I didn't even know sometimes if I was an alcoholic, ? I still question the alcohol part. I don't know. . But I know that I would sit in meetings and people would get to share how they felt. And I never got to do that. Exactly. , I never- no one ever asked me how I fucking felt, ? It was just , if I had a feeling, whatever it was, I didn't even probably know what it was for years. I probably thought I had indigestion in my brain, ? , who knows? Exactly. But if I had a fee, I just- I had to figure it out myself. . And , I mean, it just- when I got into the rooms and people could share how they felt, I was , I'm not going to do that. . Because I was , I'm going to do what I felt. And nobody could say anything. There's no crosstalk allowed. somebody got to share how they felt and it just got to sit there. And man, I didn't know how much of my life, my whole life I'd needed not even to maybe say something, but to even be in the environment of that. . To have an idea or a feeling or thought be spoken into the world and have it not completely rejected, ? . I've- , I don't know. I got to be careful sometimes not to always take things back to how I feel because my fee- my feelings sometimes it's a secret. It's , , when somebody puts a dollar on a string, I'll go get that dollar, ? To see how I feel about something. But I'll be- they'll pull me back into all that old shame. Yes. I have to be careful of that. . . . what are some of the mechanisms you guys use in REACT? what are some of the things that help people get to those core issues? it's divided into two phases. part of what you realize with trauma is it's- healing trauma means reprocessing it. That doesn't mean just going into the pain and sitting in the pain as if there's benefit in just feeling pain. . It means I'm going now with tools that I can learn from it, that I can heal it. - . that I can grow through it. That's reprocessing it. But there's a risk in taking people to reprocess it because you are opening a can of worms. It is going to take them to some pain and trigger them. And they need what we call agency. They need a certain amount of tools before they ever get to the trauma or else the trauma is going to overwhelm them. I see. you guys work on those tools. phase one is self-awareness, basic tools, emotional recognition. . Emotional regulation, what to do if you're triggered, building a safe community for people that they can share emotions and not have anybody judge them where people hold space for them. that's phase one. Then phase two, we start digging into shame. We dig into anger. We dig into emotions. We dig into boundaries. We dig into grief and loss. And we start getting into the kind of the main areas of trauma and really help people begin to heal. the first half of the week is really digging deep into it. And then the second half is practical tools and what does healthy look . Shame is such a huge magnet, huh? Huge. How does shame start? Is that a fair question about shame? What's a- I think it's- . It starts with the parent-child relationship. . . It starts with the parent-child relationship not being . Is shame originally a positive thing? There must be a certain- Is there a certain value to a little bit of shame? what is a little bit of shame called? It's - , some people have tried to make a distinction around healthy shame versus toxic shame. . . But to me, healthy shame is actually guilt. . guilt is if I do something that violates love. I tell a lie, hit somebody, I cheat on them, I should feel guilty. . That's natural. Because that motivates me to get back to a loving, healthy situation. Because as long as I stay in stuff that violates love, I'm destroying relationships. I'm making a worse life for myself. guilt is a good thing and I can resolve guilt. it's about what I do that violates love. Shame is about who I am. It's nothing about what I do. Wow. that's huge to notate those two things. it can be to feel some guilt about things. It's important. . But shame is about me getting a sign , hey, man, this is almost a U-turn sign. Exactly. It's a good road sign, really. Exactly. Even though it hurts some, you need that because it helps you recognize- Motivates you. You're going against love. Exactly. You're doing something against love. But then shame is unhealthy. And I can do nothing about it. shame is about who I am that I'm not good enough. . Shame I then attach whatever I did immediately and that feeling. Exactly. And that's where the two then feed each other. You're a piece of shit. You are a whore. As soon as I do something wrong, that proves my shame. . That I'm useless. And that goes back to that child doing something wrong. Something's wrong in his world. Exactly. In her world. And they don't know how to solve it because they're a child. And the only person in their world is them. if something's wrong in their world or they're not getting what they need or their needs met, then of course it must be their fault. And that's where shame builds. Exactly. Wow. that's where we say that a key part of complex trauma is false guilt. you're made to feel guilty though you've done nothing wrong, which then feeds shame. dad says, I'm mad because you're a terrible kid. , no, that's not why dad's mad or I drink because you're a terrible kid. . Dad's mad because he's a Lions fan. Exactly. And it's, you're now feeling I did something wrong. Therefore, I'm mad. . I'm wrong. Therefore, I am wrong. . . . Man. And to help people heal, they got to deal with legitimate guilt and they can fix that. They got to correct all the lies that led to false guilt. every time that somebody's impatient with them, they go, what am I doing wrong? You're not doing anything wrong. That's the other person's problem. Or somebody's upset with them because they said no. No, you set a good boundary. . And you're angry. You shouldn't apologize for that, but they feel guilty or they relax for a few minutes. I'm lazy. No, you're not. You're relaxing. . Fuck. you got false guilt from lie after lie after lie. you got to reprogram that. Then you got shame that I'm therefore not good enough, which is all based on lies. And that's all got to be reprogrammed. And that takes a ton of work. Does it? . What does some of that work look if you even. . I would say shame to me is the biggest healing tool. . It's the biggest healing journey that comes out of complex trauma and it takes the longest and takes years. Wow. Because there's many thousands of subtle lies that people develop that they don't even realize. . And the problem is they get triggered easily and then all of a sudden they're spiraling downhill that I'm a piece of shit and they don't know why. But something's triggered an old lie that's led to that proves that I'm useless. . And there's a big journey in self-awareness and beginning to understand the lies that I believe that are below the surface that are subconscious. Beginning to understand the things that trigger that. Begin to understand the patterns that take place once I'm triggered and where I spiral to and stopping those patterns. That's the work. And if I can give one other piece of teaching. . . . . the complex trauma to understand the two parts of the brain that are kind of the main things that motivate our behavior. the limbic system, which is the emotion center, that's the child's brain. That develops first. Yes. Then the cortex that keeps growing till we're 35-ish. The thinking, the executive function that gets called, that processes information. The key thing about the limbic brain, the child brain, is its instant gratification focus. -. a child, do you want to do your chores or do you want to sit here and watch TV? , whatever makes me feel good. . that determines what I want to do. And then whether I want to do something, I don't feel it. I don't feel doing that. Or I want a new puppy. I feel feeding the puppy until I don't feel feeding the puppy. emotions guide my behavior and everything is instant gratification focused. Wow. And a lot of that, if you had trauma as a child, then you're still, even that can be a pattern. Exactly. That you still continue. Because , that's a lot of addicts. the key with that is that when fear is triggered, that's limbic brain. if you're in complex trauma, you're in constant fear. you're constantly in your limbic brain. your cortex doesn't develop properly. a teenager, they're going through gradually switching to their cortex and learning to think stuff through. Complex trauma. Complex trauma. You're still in your limbic brain, still thinking only of instant gratification. What do I feel ? Everything is about emotions, even though you're not aware of your emotions. And a huge part of what happens with shame when it's triggered is I could be living as an adult today out of my cortex, making good decisions, healthy decisions. When my shame gets triggered, it triggers my limbic brain again. Wow. And I go back to a child. And I think a child and I believe the lie. . I'm a child and I believe the lies of the child. And what you realize is the battles in your brain between your cortex and your limbic brain, they believe two different things. Wow. Depends on what gets triggered. Wow. It's almost you have a heaven and hell there kind of. Exactly. Oh my gosh. And that's where people with shame, they can be doing wonderful, great in relationships and their shame gets triggered and all of a sudden they're destroying everybody, calling their kids terrible names, calling their partner terrible names. . And it's what just happened there? , you went to your limbic brain and you acted out of that shame lie. That's when the damage gets done. Those triggers, huh? Those things, it's wild. You had to go back to that. . Gosh. you can imagine though how long that would take to heal because when that trigger hits, it hits with an intensity of a locomotive because it brings with it cortisol, it brings with it all the chemicals. All the drugs, . And how do you stop that? the train's out of the station here, buddy. Oh, . If somebody pulls up with a train full of drugs, dude. It's gone. I'm getting on to it. Exactly. I'm just going to tell you that now and I'll probably sit in business class. But , my brother sometimes would say trying to locate that shame and stuff, it was taking panties out of a bathtub. . That's what he talks about it sometimes. . Some days you get a couple and some days you just, you don't even know you're in it. . as a person grows in healing, let's say you would get triggered and you start spiraling but you've got enough self-awareness you'd catch yourself. . And you, I know what's going on here. Then you ground yourself, you regulate your emotions and you get back to your cortex and you go, hey, I'm believing lies there. I'm not that useless person. . And you don't have to do that. And you get, and what you find is all of a sudden that spiral just stopped. instead of being in it for four days, you're now only in it for 15 minutes and you caught yourself. Now there's going to be a bit of a hangover effect as you kind of keep working through emotions with it. But within a day, you're back to being in a pretty good place and you've grown a little bit. And then because of that, you probably won't get triggered as intensely in that area. Again, because you've grown that next time something happens, the trigger won't be intense and it won't be as frequent. And over time, you're growing with greater infrequency and less intensity until you don't get triggered there anymore. But that can take a few years. But it can happen. It can happen. Wow. It's really, it's really possible. It is. . Man. . Do you get a lot of people who are, feel at their other side? . Do you get a lot of people who are at their wits end? What are things that you're seeing people doing outside of drugs? Patterns that I would love to, if it's to hear about some of those. . Because I would love for people to know that these types of things are repairable. . I would say some of the main ones that I would see now are mental health issues major depression, anxiety issues that just make life unlivable really. And are really getting in the way of relationships, family, stuff that. Secondly is anger issues that just the flare ups and the outbursts. That's what I have. And the damage that it does that just brings them to a desperation point that I got to get help or I'm going to lose everything. Then with younger people, there's this greater and greater kind of self-harm, suicidal ideation. Deep in their thinking that's going on. Eating disorder stuff that is slowly getting them to a point where they go, I think I got a problem. that's big. But I think maybe the biggest one now is the number of people burning out. They just are working 60, 80 hour weeks and they're getting to a point where they're just can't do this anymore. What's going on? What's going on with my life? But I think to me the biggest one that probably gets people is relationships. Just especially when they have kids. I can't. I got to be a better dad than my dad was. And now I'm, though I said I'd never be my dad, I'm becoming my dad. I know. Man, that's got to be tough, huh? . And it's just a wake up call for them that rocks their world, but that's what they need. And what do they, that's one of the biggest pressures you see with people in just that having to be better than their parents? Or is it , what do you mean? No, no. Relationships with kids, things just start to get tougher or they fall apart. . the, you get their kids start rebelling or their kids are getting into drugs or their kids are cutting and they're going , I'm failing as a parent. Why? What's, what? Then they start to think about it and they go, , , I get it. I came from crappy upbringing and I'm passing it on. And they, I think what they realize is complex trauma tends to be generational. Really? If I don't deal with it, I pass on what I've learned. Oh, of course. And I do it to my kids. Because to me, that's all I know. Those are the only tools in my toolbox. I'm going to use them. And it becomes a generational thing. And when you see what you're doing to your kids, you go. Oh, the proof's too real. I can't do that to my kids because I know what it did to me. Wow, that's interesting. , when you have a child, you really get to see the proof of the recipe you made. And then you realize you're the damn ingredient. , exactly. And the other piece to that is what happens for a lot of kids is when you're living in constant pain that you can't resolve, you go, how do I make the pain go away? , I can't. I can escape or I cannot care. don't love anybody. Shut down love and not care. Just get hard inside. And they can do that and pull it off and look they're successful until they have kids. And all of a sudden, love takes- Love wins, huh? . And all of a sudden, they love again. And they go, everything matters now again and I got to do something. wow that's got to be scary i got i got two things actually tim is it possible for parents to do a good job i don't want to get just stuck in this place where it's we're just contributing to this thing in the world that everybody's damaged and that we all need help that's one question and just i don't forget when we say things are generational do you think that where we are now and people there's a lot more mental health issues and stuff that is it because just how we've gone through time and this is where we're ending up at as humans is it because i've had theories that maybe it's because we don't have to have fear of the a bear in the woods as much anymore now that fear turns inward and we're hunting this bear inside of us or this lion in the shadows all the time but those are those are my two questions why do you think it's kind of coming to a head in a lot of ways and is that just in america too is it just in western culture i would say probably western culture about 10 to 20 years ahead of a lot of cultures and understanding this i think to me what's happened is the research scientifically that's been done on the brain and trauma in the last 10 to 15 years has really started to open people up to understanding stuff and what we've begun to realize is you can't heal trauma just with knowledge you need safe connection oh you got to have an environment where people can talk about it and people have started to create those environments and people are starting to talk and in some ways it's it's it's a new phenomena but it's the way it should always have been that we could talk about what's really going on but we're getting there gradually but i think it's really been fueled by a lot of the research that's been happening and the growing understanding of how magnificent our brains are and how they develop and all of that and how childhood career and my environment believed that's the new environment with the newer generations the way it is that interesting to be able to have that mix within a child the the your personal culture our families how are you doing how do you heal Konohana and if you would just say i've seen lots and lots of people leaving the cell phone there that understand that it's just being a way to privilege your business or get to understand more scientifically what's been happening. That's been key. I think when it comes to parenting, a couple of thoughts. The danger is every parent wants to be a perfect parent, and it's really important to go, it's all about good enough parenting. Nobody's a perfect parent, but we can be good enough parents. And that means we're going to fail. We can't be super man to our kids. We have limitations. We can't be awake 24-7, but we can be good enough. a child needs parents who are attuned to them and who connect. Now, you don't connect 24-7 with a child, but they need a few minutes a day of just really safe connection with the parent to feel, , this is my rock. This is, I'm secure. Everything's with the world. And parents can provide that good enough connection. And what's been important, I think, for parents to understand is our whole focus in the West as parenting is you've got to meet their physical needs. Physical needs, , you've got to make sure they get their milk at this time and they get to bed and they have safety and all that. What we're realizing is the child's biggest needs are emotional needs. And there's acceptance and that attunement. And that connection. All of those needs are important for a child if they're going to develop normally and healthily. . And if parents can learn how to meet their emotional needs of their kids, that's what they can do. the other piece to that is we often talk about dysfunctional family, and we think the opposite of dysfunctional is a perfect family, but there's no such thing as a perfect family. . there's no such thing as a perfect family. . there's no such thing as a perfect family. . there's no such thing as a perfect family. . The word dis is actually a Greek word that means pain. And it's a family in pain is a dysfunctional family. it's a family that's inflicting pain on each other, but is never resolving it. it's a complex trauma family. the opposite of a dysfunctional family is a functional family, which is a family that inflicts pain once in a while, but they resolve it. And by resolving that pain, then the child isn't traumatized because it's getting resolved. . . . That processing is huge. Exactly. I think when I think back on my own life, and not to just talk about my own life, I guess, I just want, I'm trying to have shared, , just I can try and relate, , I'm not sitting here trying to be , oh, my life. But , I would, if somebody had been there to be , hey, this is what's happening. And this is why it's happening. Oh, man. Because otherwise, , I was just trying to figure everything out. Not for myself. And there was never just any information. There was no, I felt that's what I felt when I was a kid. I felt I worked at a restaurant, , that I had to work at every day. And I never got paid. And I never knew what was on the menu. And I never even knew if we were open or closed. You didn't know where the pots and pans were. But I had to be there every single day. . And I had to show up to work. That's how I felt. And it. . I don't know what that means or anything. , I think for a lot of kids in complex trauma, they feel they're chasing their tail, running in circles in a fog. They just know they're supposed to be doing something that nobody's showing them what to do. they're running around hoping that they're going to figure it out. But they're not sure if they're figuring out. there's just this constant haze of confusion. . That's there. And unsafe, man. I remember. I mean, I wet. The bed was probably 27, probably. . I mean, I remember when I would go to bed at night, it felt I was literally clocking in for a job as an orderly at a hospital because I knew in a couple hours I was going to have to get up and change my sheets. And sometimes I wet the bed three or four times a night, to be honest. And that's very common with complex trauma. I would pee around my bed. I thought that something was going to come get me. And I'd heard that animals will pee and prevent other animals from coming. Mark the territory. I mean, it's. When I think back on that, some kid doing that, a fucking nine year old kid doing that. I mean, I was the pattern I had to go through to look around my room to make sure there was nothing in there was going to get me. It must have taken 12 minutes each night to do it all the exact same way that I could then get into my bed, man. I was. And then we get children that kind of sleep with their back against the wall facing the door that they're not going to have anybody. . The way behind them and they can see anything that comes in. Some even sleep with a weapon nearby in case something happens. That's crazy. . And . And I think of my stuff. My child is pretty light when I think about what some kids could go through. . , mine was really more neglect. It wasn't any abuse, , but it was just wandering around in a fucking. At an empty Costco with a fucking name tag on. wondering where the manager was anyway sorry sometimes I'm still I still have a lot of anger about it's been hard to process over the years no but to me you should and if I can just speak to that because to me what happens in a lot of complex trauma families is anger is seen as bad you're always punished for anger though when you think about anger is actually designed to be something good if something violates love somebody lies to me or somebody cheats on me I should get angry because what they're doing is going to destroy the relationship if they don't fix it anger is actually a healthy thing that motivates me to act to say hey this isn't this is this is wrong but in complex trauma that gets knocked down never validated judged and part of the healing journey for a lot of people is being able to validate their anger I should be angry because that was crap I shouldn't have been neglected that now I'm not gonna stay there I'm not gonna feed it and turn it into deep bitterness but I need to let that anger be honest if I'm gonna heal yes sometimes as an adult I feel I'm healed from it sometimes but I still feel that kid is not happy exactly that's literally what it feels sometimes he comes up to the surface of my fucking throat yes literally he'll be just playing in the distance and he'll run up and yell out exactly just out of the I cannot it's exactly and I say that's where he's at I'm saying we're gonna cheat trying to work with him but I think a lot of my a lot of my anger now is from I have unrealistic realistic expectations of people of myself yes I didn't even realize it literally to three or four days ago somebody brought it to my attention man my brother and i was oh my gosh i've had him since i was my whole life i've had this to-do list that i don't even know i feel every day i'm already behind schedule and i don't have a schedule that's what every single i'm running behind gotta do this what is it i don't know but we better get we i gotta do it and that's how i am no and nothing no one can ever do anything perfect enough to tie that in with what you just shared what we found with most people with complex trauma is what they begin to realize is it's there's a part of them that got left behind that's still a child some refer to as their inner child but the little boy that's still down there and some have a whole bunch of little boys that are different ages and different that person is a politician exactly but anyways what they've realized is they there's a part of them that kind of hates that little boy and wishes you shut up and then quit bugging them and grow up and all of that kind of treats them they were treated and they have to learn to love and nurture that little boy because that's part of them and just welcome them make space for them be curious what's going on why are you upset i'm not going to judge you just help me understand and then help them process through it because nobody helped them process through it and eventually that little boy can heal and that's a useful tool for a lot of people is beginning to go let's welcome that little boy and parent that little boy even though it's me but it's part of me and it's a part of me that got wounded if somebody's sitting there now and they're oh i'm gonna go to the hospital and they're oh i'm gonna go to the hospital and they're oh i'm gonna go to the hospital now he's listening and they're how would you start to have some of that conversation with yourself and is there a certain setting you would kind of do it in just to even try and get us some awareness of that inner child as people say a lot of it's different for everybody and you got to kind of find what works for you what some people do is they can go in their imagination to kind of a safe place in their house that they liked as a kid or a safe place in their house that they liked as a kid or a safe place in their house that they liked place in the backyard or a tree or something in the woods whatever and they can go there and kind of picture that little child and connect with that little child others can do it through going through picture albums see when they're four years old when they're seven years old i remember what i was feeling then and what i was thinking or the other one is when they get triggered and that voice in their head and they go that how old do i feel now and they go i feel three i feel eight and it's let's connect with that part of me and that's that part of the your limbic brain that's been triggered which doesn't keep track of time that's still stuck at that age wow that's a great point when that's happening that part of you is showing up exactly that's as crazy as it is it's a great time to be able to do that and i think that's a great point and i think that's a great point to connect what i say to people is a trigger don't get down on yourself if you get triggered go a trigger is my little boy saying ouch and be curious and go it's trying to get my attention saying there's a wound here that never has been going on buddy exactly i went to this center for a week it was in this was in scottsdale it was about sexual health not necessarily about actual physical act of sex but it emotional health emotional wellness all that and we had to go get a doll from a dang baby oh build-a-bears we roll up and build a bears dude a couple i mean we gotta have a white van and went in there obviously we look politicians we have burps definitely burps one of us definitely a peeping tom give it out candy at the back we look flashers that had gone on a field trip that's what we look we look definitely and then we're in there buying doll and there's these other there's other people there's kids in there getting it was just the whole thing was just bizarre but then you'd have to sit with this dang doll and just talk to and every now and then there was some moments of you could almost feel a doll just be hey man just sit here with me for a little bit you could almost feel it was a feeling you would get hey just stay with me for a minute man if i if i was when i was a kid if somebody just stayed with me for a minute made a big difference man i can't even i mean a minute it just would have had a it would have made me feel somebody wants to be there with me i just never i can't believe i even i'm not trying to have self-pity but i just can't believe that shit man and i'm fortunate that we had food and stuff on the table i can't imagine in places where kids don't have that or don't have a sibling to at least come in the room and make them smile or something man it's heartbreaking it is they should have a program when you leave the hospital with your child that there's what i'm saying even a basic hey look in your child's eyes this is how you do this these are the these are four things do they have anything that they're starting to oh what's her name she's out of san francisco she just wrote a book called the deepest now it's a good book and she's been very much involved with ace which is at adverse childhood experiences the is that a test you take oh i think i and she's 10 questions or something and she's she was a pediatrician in san francisco nadine burke harris is her name she's moved up the ranks in san francisco and she's started parenting courses for people desmond two who said we got to stop pulling people out of the room river we got to go down river and stop them from getting pushed in the river and that's what this is all about we got to start working with parents we've actually we're actually developing a parenting course that we're piloting now just because it's it's great work helping people get healthy in their 40s and 50s but we got help parents not pass this on we got to fix it and try to help at the beginning some let me think and what were we just talking about before the ACEs the ACEs quiz here this is a fascinating I took this test in a treatment facility and it blew my mind let's go back just a little bit I just want to read the top what to know before you take the quiz researchers determined that ten specific traumatic childhood experiences or ACEs could be linked to a higher likelihood of health challenges later in life and that the likelihood of these negative effects increased with the number of ACEs a child experienced Tim you want to take us in a little further the whole these were really developed with a focus mainly on abuse and we still use it because it's very important to know what the negative effects are and what the negative effects are and we still use it because it's very effective but it's that hidden neglect stuff it touches on but it doesn't develop and most professionals now use this test but then we add other stuff to help people capture some of the neglect stuff but what basically has come out of the itÂåóEricÅà fidgÉapÉëÉµ self-test is through years of tracking people with it is if you have two aces or three aces or six aces or seven aces . If you're two aces or three aces orines. your brain is off it's sort of you're sort of oh there must be some hard strategy. No we need we need a little bit of bias but some kind of live advice to that more aces you get the more your chances of depression mental health issues the more your chances of drug alcohol addiction the more your chances of violence in the family abuse partner abuse the more your chances of suicide attempts it's just it and then your greater your chances for heart issues diabetes health issues it just messes everything up in your body it's fascinating it says here the 10 aces and we'll get to the questions in a second were defined as the following childhood experience child childhood experiences physical sexual or verbal abuse physical or emotional neglect separation or divorce a family member with mental illness a family member addicted to drugs or alcohol a family member who is in prison witnessing a parent being abused it says still there are variables that the quiz doesn't account for including stressors outside of the home as the important role positive influences play on buffering the effects of trauma let's see those questions real quick did a parent or other adult in the household often or very often a swear at you insult you put you down or humiliate you or be act in a way that made you afraid that you might be physically hurt did a parent or other adult in the that's number one there's 10 questions here and the more you get the odds of countless tough or pastures in your life yes the consequences the ramifications just grow did a parent or other adult in the household often or very often push grab slap or throw something at you or b ever hit you hard that you had marks or were injured did an adult or person at least five years older than you ever touch you or fondle you or have you touched their body in a sexual way or be attempt or actually have oral anal or vaginal intercourse with you did you often or very often feel that a no one in your family loved you or thought you were important or special or b your family didn't look out for each other feel close to each other or support each other you want to do these tim is that did you often or very often feel that a you didn't have enough to eat had to wear dirty clothes and had no one to protect you or b your parents were drunk or high to take care of you or take you to the doctor if you needed it and number six were your parents ever separated or divorced and i would just say that lots of research is starting to happen around the effects of divorce on children because often we think it doesn't affect them that much because they still see both parents but it does and it's just very subtle but it's powerful was your parent caregiver a often or often pushed grabbed slapped or had something thrown at him or her or b sometimes often or very often kick bitten hit with a fist or hit with something hard or see ever repeatedly hit over at least a few minutes or threatened with a gun or knife did you live with anyone who has a was a problem drinker or alcoholic or use street drugs number nine was a household member depressed or mentally ill or did a household member attempt a suicide and 10 did a household member go to prison those 10 questions there the more you answer if you even get three of those oh yes your odds of addiction I think are above 50 and that's unbelievable because I don't know I don't think I know 10 people that don't have at least two of them exactly and you notice it's talked about neglect just a little bit but it doesn't go into a workaholic dad narcissistic dad all the subtle little types of neglect and that's we've actually created a an ace test of 65 questions that really capture all the nuances of neglect interesting this I just remember read I remember we in this in this facility we were in the hospital and we were in the hospital and we were in the hospital and we were in the hospital and we were in the hospital and we were in the hospital and we all went over this and we all went over this and then people read theirs and half of the class and some of the people in the class were mayors in their towns and stuff and they had really some of them had really beaten some unforeseeable odds and then it made sense to you when you looked around back around my high school when certain kids are oh it makes total sense why that kid's not alive anymore or why that guy's in prison or why that guy's in a rehab facility pretty wild pretty wild but I don't want to get into that downer mentality but it is just fascinating there's a lot out there and that just supports much of the research that's happening now just in understanding the effects of childhood on a we're not just blowing hot air here this is all researched and continues to be researched in great detail and it's just growing and growing in our understanding of this very important topic and that's what I think I was just curious about I just want if people are because here's where I found myself I found myself in a place for me where I couldn't understand why I wasn't able to do certain things especially with relationships and stuff that I kept thinking that it would change and it and it just hasn't it's gotten better things have gotten better I'm a lot more aware I don't make a lot of the same mistakes the negotiations he does he probably hasn't seen no big change in my actions at places that I'm a registered dad and I potential ºæπ ad π µæøÅ floralinclude my love that youcharge forward andÉØ CATHERNALLRAYN thnh JiangÆø that come to our program there is hope but be prepared it takes a lot of work and it's not a quick fix yes it's going to take a lot of time because this started in childhood and you don't undo that overnight but there is hope i heard you talk on one of your thanks for saying that to me and just didn't know anybody that's listening and i believe that i believe that when i go into meetings and you see guys that two years ago were addicted to prostitutes and now they're getting married and they're having children it's you see people change their lives or guys who had never even been on a date in two years and were just addicted to pornography and didn't even realize they were addicted it was just a pattern of comfort i remember when i found my wiener dude when i was probably i don't even know once i found something that could make me feel good soothing i you could have played all the you could play all the madden you wanted i was i had my own game exactly dude and i was two-point conversing and all the time but i was doing it was that was unbelievable to me i would bike across town to go look at pornography at my buddy's house going and digging up pornos over there man it was just because it was the first time i also had a relationship with a woman even was just on a damn page or drawing we had to do to withdraw you some ovaries or something for the weekend can i speak scientifically to that again i don't want to go too long here but cool and sorry i know i'm just talking about a lot of stuff tim i just sorry we're doing our best what we know is when you look at the brain chemicals the brain only produce is designed to produce positive chemicals you got dopamine pleasure chemical then you got oxytocin that feel good connected what you get ecstasy is part of and then you've got oxytocin i'm in love chemical those three chemicals are designed to be produced all the time in the brain of a child because they connect with a parent they feel good they feel a deep joy they feel a deep contentment and their needs are being met and that's connection and the meeting and needs causes those chemicals to be released complex trauma you're not connecting and your needs aren't being met zero chemicals wow what's your brain feel cortisol anger hyper pain rebellion all of that is happening what do you then find the first thing that gives you comfort and part of what we know is your parents are supposed to soothe you when you get dysregulated you might get hyperentomized and you're not connected with the positive emotions but what happens when you get dysregulated when you have negative emotions when you have negative emotions but if you can't connect to them then you're not being soothed properly you find the first thing that self-soothes and some people rock we would rock my brother-in-law's beds were on wheels and in the morning they would be in the corner of their other corner of the room exactly we will rock all night that and what we know is when you cut it actually releases opioids in the brain You don't feel the pain, you feel the relief of the good feeling. And guys find their wiener, and all of a sudden they get a good chemical in their brain. , that's better than no chemicals, let's go back and let's get more. Serving up that wiener sauce, it was horrible. But that's crazy, , it's , oh, this is a good feeling. Of course I'm gonna do it again and again. Why else wouldn't I? The second something triggers me, I feel bad, I'm gonna make myself feel good. Now I have the ability to make myself feel good. That was the first time in my life I had the ability, any method, that's why I think it's important to, your child just doesn't know how to make themselves feel better. if something is wrong with your child, you have to sit and teach them. I'm not trying to preach at people, but I wish somebody from me had sat and said, hey, now you feel this way, this is gonna, you're gonna be . It's everything you're gonna get to hear, everything's gonna be . And I'm gonna sit here with you while you do it. And , man, stuff that, just crucial. When it, before you go, Tim, and thank you much, man. Really, really appreciate it. I really kind of think of this as a service call in a way. And just grateful, man. many of your videos, you have the one, it's , you're leaving, can I, will you take, what is that video title? It's the codependency one. It's the codependency one. . If you leave, can I come with you? . . , it's just , get out, can I come with you? It's , that was , God. , what's kind of, it's this, it's complex trauma isn't a one, there's not one fix really. . It's, what is there, how do you view the repairing process overall? And I think it's great to emphasize that there's not just one fix because much of the focus in the West has been around, let's just do this one program and then you're magically gonna be fixed. we're always looking for almost a magical solution. Oh, even with treatment centers, it's , here's a 30 day treatment center. Exactly. What are you gonna do on 34th day? Exactly. what I'm saying? That's unbelievable that it's a 30 days doesn't really, it'll help you detox. Exactly. Exactly. Anyway, sorry. what we teach our clients is we are intellectual beings, we're physical beings, we're emotional beings, we're relational beings, and we're spiritual beings. We have to learn to meet all five, the needs of all five of those areas if we're gonna be healthy. And that's what parents were supposed to do is meet the needs of all five of those areas. But now we got programs that just try to do a spiritual only solution, that doesn't work. Others try to do just, let's say, let's do this one little emotional gimmick. . No, you gotta learn to be. Physical. Curl your way to fricking complete freedom. Exactly. And it's learning, we're bio, psycho, social, spiritual. We gotta learn to meet all those needs and get healthy in all those areas. That's the bottom line. It seems a lot of work sometimes. It's not a magic solution. It's hard when people's lives get busy too. I can't imagine once people have a family and stuff, and a father or mother has to live, they have to leave away from their family to go get wellness. if I can ask you, and this kind of almost, I don't know if it's off the record, but you can decide what to do with it. we've got a UFC fighter that's approached us about taking our program, Boston Red Sox, Detroit Lion, Detroit Tigers, some movie stars. But they've all said, we kinda got celebrity status and we're not, can't fit a program into our schedules. Plus, we're not sure we wanna be in a group we're gonna get adored, kinda. Not sure we're gonna be able to share freely. we've been giving thought to kinda what do we do to kinda people in your status of life that. Have some popularity that would make things uncomfortable for them or other people maybe? . Or make the pattern might feel different? , and then has maybe some restraints around their schedules. That doesn't allow them to commit for a 15 week program. we've been giving some thought to just some things we can do that might enable celebrity type people to take advantage of the program and still have some connection with people, but maybe not the full connection daily. Any thoughts on that? I would love to help you think, navigate it some. . Or get a. You've said that you've always wanted to do. funnily say this man, I'm just talking with a buddy of mine, we just had a group last week. Trying to maybe, , build something, or just not build something, but , I would love to think about it, or I wish there were more meetings that some people could go to. . And what that looks . , I'd love to talk with you about how I can be a part of stuff. . Or, if there's some meetings that I can join or I have friends that would to be in that. would to be in meetings i think sometimes they're maybe afraid to be in some meetings or whatever but i'd love to talk about that a little bit more because i would value that tim 100 because we just see we're getting more and more requests from celebrities but it's a special niche with special needs and it's we almost got to custom make something here that's gonna need a lot of wisdom to do it but it's doable it's funny i thought that if i could get everybody in the world to see me that would fix everything that it would that it would make up for whatever i didn't know that's what i needed but it was that's what i wanted much and i was oh if my mother sees that everybody thinks i'm she'll have to then see oh he's for years i could i think one of the reasons i was having trouble i didn't even realize is getting it in the place and then i was oh i'm gonna have to do it again and i'm gonna have to get it in the place and then i'm gonna have to do it again and i'm gonna have to do it again and a relationship i was still in this relationship with my mother yes exactly i was still literally i felt somebody standing on a dock waiting for their mom to come and validate them just literally just to hold just to i hear that all the time really it's unbelievable and i don't mean it as a shade to my mother my mother did it i have a lot of really cool memories she there was just that part she didn't even she didn't even know it existed if you'd have showed it to her as a color she wouldn't be able to see it what types of things can people notice in their life where they maybe have had complex trauma that they didn't realize it's affecting this place is there any way we can put some light on that or is that too broad of a question i think again for many people workaholic people pleasing never able to say no professional workaholic i think again for many people workaholic people pleasing never for many people workaholic people pleasing never able to say no professional words of exactly And what we've, we started with the React and then the Lyft course, but not everybody can do that. what we've started now is some self-study courses that people can take on their own time. And then they have an optional group they can go to once a month, just to kind of share and talk about stuff. Oh, cool. Have a one-on-one coach if they want to process through stuff. that's now available. And then we are doing some workshops on narcissism, inner child stuff, internal family system stuff, shame issues. we're trying to do more available stuff to busy people. can I tell you one of my favorite stories to tell people? There's actually a video now on YouTube. Where a guy's actually built a bike that operates backwards. when you think of a bike, you learn to ride a bike at four or five, six years old. And at first you got to concentrate a lot to get your balance, to turn the steering wheel. Oh . Remember how loose the, remember how crazy the beginning is? You're falling and, but you keep working and concentrating. Oh . You fall. Somebody's dad calls you a G-A-Y every time. You're what? . . . . . And then pretty soon you could be talking to your buddies and. . And you're not even thinking about riding, but you're, it's, it moves from your conscious brain to a subconscious program that just operates. . And now you could go without riding a bike for 30 years and jump back on and you'd ride it without even thinking. You'd just pick it back up. this guy built a bike where if you turn the handlebars to the left, you actually, the wheel goes to the . Oh my gosh. Why did he do it? Was he angry at somebody? He wanted to test how quickly could you relearn to ride a bike? Wow. how long it took? Six months to a year. No. . you're just saying to relearn things, it takes a while. It takes some time. Exactly. Especially when you learn it young. And if somebody's just going to therapy, ? What can they go talk to? How can they start a conversation with their therapist that could help them create more ambiance around maybe some of the stuff that may have happened and how it affects them now? . a lot of people go to therapy now because of a crisis in the present. They need to be able to understand that crisis is probably a symptom of something from the past. And a lot of therapists just try to give you practical tools. , try this, try this, try this. And they're just putting band-aids on cuts on, on the symptom. If you can get your therapist to go , why am I doing this? What, what's underneath that's driving that response and begin to look at shame, begin to look at fears that are there, fears of abandonment, fears of intimacy, fears of rejection, fears of failure. All of those can start getting down to the core root issues that come out of trauma. . Sometimes I'll just say, I'm not going to do it. I'm going to do it. I'm going to do it. I'm going to do it. I'm going to do it. I'm going to do it. I'm going to do it. I'm going to do it. Sometimes I can ask myself what's going on, , and try to answer myself, , try to legitimately answer myself. Cause my first thought would be , oh, nothing, nothing. But then it's , , sometimes a fee, I get a feeling first and that's a clue. Yes. A feeling is just , , , it's just a little bit of a, you saw something, but you don't really know. Sometimes if I feel something, I try to feel it more. I'm , , how can I feel this more? there's a new term called compassionate inquiry. And it's when you get a feeling in the past, we'd get that critic, you stupid, why are you feeling that way? And we judge yourself and get really hard on ourselves. And it says, instead of condemning yourself, be curious, compassionate. you be kind to yourself and then go, what's going on here? And inquire. , and you change the whole way you respond to feelings and triggers, which, which is huge for a lot of people. And you give yourself some grace too. Exactly. That's the compassion. That's it. It's to give yourself some grace, man. Quit beating yourself up. Give yours just, . Give yourself some grace that you would just. . It's the least you can do now. You can do it's, , just give yourself a little bit of grace. That's one thing I've had a tough time with. And I would say probably for most of the people we work with, self-compassion is the hardest thing for them to learn. Why is it hard for us to have self-compassion? Cause shame says I deserve to beat myself up cause I'm a loser and often complex trauma parenting is. The way to motivate a child to want to change and be better is to beat them up and put them down and punish them. And then they're going to want to prove you wrong or, but that doesn't work in the long run. Eventually you start to believe you are a loser and you just give up. , but you still got all those things in your head that you keep putting yourself down. And then for many people, there's that justice piece that if I commit the crime, I got to do the time. . I did something bad. I'm a bad person. I got to punish myself before I can let myself out of prison. . And that there's that sense of justice that has to be served in their mind. And even, and if they're too hard on themselves and they're going to be punished themselves for crimes that aren't even real. And you're in prison forever cause you never let yourself out. . Gosh, the crazy thing is I can't even remember some of the ridiculous patterns I used to have inside of me. I used to have this belief that I had to. . . . . . . . . . . . . And it sounds silly, but sometimes it feels me swallow on different sides of your mouth. I had this thing. I had to swallow constantly back and forth or the world wouldn't be even. And it was this constant thing all the time. It was this constant thing. Man. Sometimes when I think back on some of the crazy stuff or little patterns, I think a lot of people have them. Some of it's just being. to me, what, what you're, you've really shown me this, the soft is that you've shown me the soft. this it shows the child's amazing ability to think there's got to be another way to fix this another option available if i try this if i try this if i try to i'll swallow different also and you start to believe that if i only do something a little bit different that'll resolve and fix the problem but pretty soon you're rocking in your bed you're peeing around your bed you're sleeping with your back to the wall you're swa you feel you got to control every little element of life but it's not fixing anything but you're still doing it but it's the brain just keeps giving one more let's try this let's try this then let's try this then and you can keep going until you're in your 30s but eventually you're wearing yourself out and you go it's hopeless it's not fixing it man it took me long to see that i'm just it's it's the heart of the sea but you're it's hard to see the water when you're the fish what everybody say it's hard to drink the water or something if you're at the aquarium or whatever but that was god man i wish i had gotten a little bit of perspective earlier but that's one of the toughest parts man is just seeing that thing recognizing that pattern i used to think if i was a girl maybe if i was a girl my mother would love me or that i was a otter and i could not be doing something wrong i don't know if that the answer is yes just go with it or else you don't you're gone you're done it's your business come on man until i get bankrupt be loved i don't want to always just pin the tail on my mother just some of that stuff man and it's not what was me stuff's just fascinating what a child can they'll create many realities but and with you're always thinking if i just set the bar a bit higher a bit higher a bit higher then that'll that'll surely fix everything oh if i could get the whole world to see me i don't even know that if i could get then my mother would of course would have to see me then exactly how could she miss me exactly if i could just and those are just operating systems i don't and they were running my life i don't even know it we still have clients in their 50s and 60s they graduate let's say from our program and they go running and telling their mom i graduated you want to see my diploma wow still looking for mom's validation to mum to actually see them for the first time in their life and they get their hopes up and mom doesn't i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure i'm not sure she just finds something to criticize or it's just still the same minimizes or she cares but it's not the way you need it exactly and they just get hurt but they're in their 50s and 60s still chasing mom's validation and i was hypersensitive as a child too i think it was that was another thing i have to i have to always say that i was hypersensitive not still in but it was it was and those are the ones that the neglect affects the most that's what i think it was for me probably in my siblings even with relationships i mean i went through this therapy recently and i was if i can't be in a relationship because i'm still in there's a huge part of me still waiting for this relationship the first one i was ever supposed to be in my first girlfriend broke up with me i said you can't break up this came out of my mouth tim i said you can't break up with me you're my mother wow because i just did the first time being in the lugar where i was ready to meet and drunk and i was not thinking about anything else and Summer when you left i thought that every good thing during those these first days i was thinking about it and i keep thinking about it and i that i i remembered she it's the serious Vitamin D FranceÅÇªè that and that i'm now thinking about all of those things and let me choose some things that i found through caring about and her lifeÔøΩÎèÑÅç It was, , this was supposed to happen a long time ago, but now it's happening. And this, there's probably a part of you that's , this was supposed to be our mother. I don't know. I don't know. I can get in all that stuff. And, and also some of it is , the more I look at all that old stuff, it's trying to find a snake, that bitch or whatever. It's , , it's , it's a snake bit you and goes off into the, and then you chase it for years. . You want to ask it why it bit you, , it's , I just got to heal it. What about forgiveness? How do, what's your, what do you, what do you think about, how do you help people with that, Tim? How does REACT help people with? I think it's been a, it's such an important concept, but it's been a badly mistaught concept. a lot of people have seen the value of forgiveness. And all of a sudden when a person comes into recovery, you need to forgive your mom. You need to forgive. I go, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. You can't forgive until you've actually forgiven. You can't forgive until you've actually validated how badly they've hurt you until you've got honest about it, until you've grieved it, until you've been able to really make space for all the emotions around that. Then you're going to get to the point where your limbic brain is sorting out all of those painful emotions and it can come to a point where it can let them go. forgiveness isn't something you're forcing. It's something that's going to naturally happen as you allow yourself to process through all the pain and anger. And that's what we're talking about. forgiveness is something you're forcing. It's something that's going to naturally happen as you allow yourself to process through all the pain and anger. forgiveness is something you're forcing. It's something that's going to naturally happen as you allow yourself to process through all the pain and anger. forgiveness is something you're forcing. Man, it's wild. I had this thought that there's this weird thing where it's , there's part of me that's afraid to not be angry at my mother because it's the only feeling I've ever had towards her. And if I let go of that, then I won't have any connection to her. Exactly. As a child. Exactly. As an adult, I can see my mother differently. . ? And, , I love my mother and I want her to be happy. I don't want her to have to work anymore. She doesn't want to. ? I wish she would just stop. Can I ask you a question? a lot of kids you that had a mother that just couldn't connect emotionally, often the only time the mother would connect emotionally is when they were bad or when they got angry. Then mom would jump in and, hey, stop that, stop that. And they go, a little bit of connection is better than no connection. Oh, interesting. I'll be bad. I'll be bad more. Or angry. I would find other people's, I found other people's moms. The second, . Surrogates. Dude, I keep going. I went to my friend William's house 20 times a weekend. His mom's , he's not here. I told you every time. I don't care. And I'm , you're here. I keep knocking just to see her look at me for a second. ? . Just wild, man. The things that you'll, ways, little ways you'll survive, little things you'll do. . It's fascinating. It's fascinating. The longing for love and nurture. Yes. That's a lot of, it's fascinating. ? Getting to be human. . It's quite a ride. Tim, people can check you out online. You have many great, many great digestible videos on YouTube. many just , just really awesome stuff, man. Thank you. . Thank you much. My brother saw you and he's , God, this guy is great. And he introduced me to him. And he introduced me to him. And he introduced me to him. And he introduced me to him. And he introduced me to you. Oh, good. And it's been cool. Because you're just saying things in a way that I can just, I could hear them. And I, that's the hardest part. Sometimes it's hard for us to hear things. Why? Partly for a lot of people because of shame is I don't want to stop and look honestly at myself. Because it might be too painful and overwhelming. And I don't want to go there. there's many defense layers that you have to get by before you're even open to. . And a lot of my years of kind of learning how to teach this stuff is how do I get by that defense layer? How do I get by that defense layer? How do I make people feel safe to challenge that area of their life and not feel that they're bad because they're doing that? Man, it is quite a Rubik's Cube. We're complex, huh? Oh. I know. What I'd be fascinated by is just kind of what response you get. . Because I think that's going to tell us a lot about what we could do differently, whether we need to add some other podcasts with more focused information. Or specific stuff. . . I'm curious about that too. I think because I know you have many , , there was shame we touched on, which I think was important. I know that there's a ton of stuff about guilt. There's many little universes. Codependency. Oh, God. I can't even. Boundaries. Boundaries. Codependency for sure. For sure. As soon as you get into the relationship stuff, then it's just everybody's ears perk up. But I think that we touched on a good understanding though, ? . Of complex trauma. People can understand maybe that they could have some things that they didn't realize. . But also that you don't have to be a victim. Not everybody has to have complex trauma. . You could have had just simple trauma. That was just one thing or some instances. But you could have also had good parenting that was there to help you process it. Or somebody, even if it wasn't a parent, that could also be there as a fixture to help you process. Exactly. . And I think bits of your personal story just filled in a lot of that for people. And I think to me, the big picture is everybody needs to learn not necessarily all the trauma stuff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . That's what a child is supposed to be learning as they're growing up. . And even if you had pretty good parents, we all still could learn more about fine-tuning being healthy. And that's really what I try to do a lot of is, yes, define the trauma in great detail and the ramifications, but really to define what does healthy look . . . And if you never thought about this, to maybe say, oh, some of that. That could be something I should look at more. I heard something that made me think or feel something. That is good clues. . A lot of time, I couldn't get a clue until I felt it would have to be a very strong feeling. And then that would be a clue. But , I think, , it's important, man. It's important for people. And , it's important. It's not important to sit there and dwell and swim in the shit. I'm a otter. I have to remember that. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . All, I would say, is I sit down in the Olympus and said, oh, kim, where did the man go? I sit on the side an we don't get a lot of questions because Kim and I, , actually sort of, they talk too much, but , I would say Kim, he just sort of do my best. They tend to say, hey, do I can go proportional to pulvers, of cam at summits or cami a lot of times. I would say no, he was wrong. He's all , , you tell me cam in numbers there. Do I get a good TousÍÎú or AreÎäî company? Or Guadalquivir. Or one of these , . Yay! And, , , Ω the first balanced pooping that I heard about, , and in between it was pretty good man we had a nice time over there and then did you go across to detroit as nope oh just did the windsor we did windsor and then we went over there to lake of the no niagara niagara falls and then we went somewhere else too i can't remember where it was toronto's up in there we had a great time huh it's beautiful over there canada's great we're grateful that you are part of north america i want to let that i'm grateful too there you go all tim fletcher thank you much brother thank you all cheers brother now i'm just floating on the breeze and i feel i'm falling these leaves i must be cornerstone oh but when i reach that ground i'll share this peace of mind i found i can feel it in my bones but it's gonna take