What do you do when you find out that someone you love has cheated on you or stolen from you or lied to you or stabbed you behind your back? , today you're going to meet two people that this has happened to, and you're going to learn what to do and more importantly, how to get your power back because you can get your power back. You're going to learn today that you always have options no matter how much this betrayal cuts you to the core. Hey, it's your friend Mel, and welcome to a tough love episode of the Mel Robbins podcast. I'm Mel Robbins. Welcome. I'm a New York Times bestselling author and one of the most respected experts in the world on change and motivation. And I want to thank you, by the way, for not only just being here with me now, but my team and I want to thank you because we have been blown away by the number of questions and the topics that you keep submitting at melrobbins.com. And I also am loving the video questions that you're DMing me on Instagram. And I'm excited to tell you, we have a brand new call-in number that you can call at any time and leave a question for me here on the show. And that number is going to always be in the show notes from now on. And today I'm really excited to tell you that we have picked two listeners of the Mel Robbins podcast to join me today because they have written in and asked advice about a topic that I unfortunately know a lot about. And that topic is betrayal. What do you do when you find out that someone you love has cheated on you or stolen from you or lied to you or stabbed you behind your back? , today you're going to meet two people that you can trust in the world that you don't trust in the world that you haven't been in L.A. And you're going to learn what to do and more importantly, how to get your power back because you can get your power back. You're going to learn today that you always have options no matter how much this betrayal cuts you to the core. And I'm also going to share stories of betrayal that have happened to me. And I want to thank both of our listeners for agreeing to be here today and for allowing me to invite you into their private coaching session because by sharing their challenges, I've been able to help you get to the bottom of the matter. And I'm also going to share stories of betrayal that have happened to me and I want to share stories of betrayal that have challenges and you getting to hear the advice in real time, they're really doing the work for all of us to create a better life. when you listen, listen with intention. Because whether you're in this situation or not, you will get something amazing out of this. There will be an insight that strikes you to your core. And this is also one of those episodes that I know you're going to love having as a resource, because you can share it with friends and family when they experience betrayal and you just want to help them. Because unfortunately, at some point, we all experience it. And that brings me to the very first question. It's from Sonia. And it's also where I am going to talk about this experience that I had recently of a big betrayal. And you better buckle up, because this first coaching session, it takes an unexpected turn near the end. And it's a doozy. Sonia wrote in asking for advice, after listening to the episode that we released a while ago called The Three Lessons I Learned During the Worst Year of My Life. And it's usually during the worst moments of your life that you get the biggest lessons. And I share this story about how a year ago at the beginning of 2022, I found out that somebody that I trusted was in my business stealing from me. They lied to me, to my face, over and over and over. They lied to team members over and over. And when I finally figured out what was going on, I realized they had been doing this for a long ass time. This betrayal knocked me on my knees. I felt stupid when I first discovered it. Then I felt hurt. Then I was furious. And it was painful. It was a painful lesson about trust. And it was also a painful lesson, but a lesson that I needed. I needed this lesson in order to be able to establish better boundaries and to level up as a businesswoman. Sonia heard me tell this story and she wanted more. She wanted to learn more. She had more questions to ask. She wanted to know, Mel, how did you handle the person who betrayed you? What did you do? Because she was dealing with a betrayal in her life too. Hi, Mel. I'm Sonia from New Zealand. Hi. How did you deal with the betrayals from your friends? Confront them and make peace with them in the end? Or can you move on without making peace in some way? And then as you just fill your life with people who are much better humans? Excellent question. in this particular instance, I did not confront the person, mainly because they had logins to a bunch of stuff related to our business. And I had to first. Once I realized this was going on, get the realities of the digital business safe and secure. And that took a couple weeks. I didn't want to send up any red flags that any issue was going on while we did that. But then, I made this decision. I thought, why would I confront this person? And what I realized. in this particular instance, is that I had already poured much energy into the situation that confronting the person or having a conversation, , that gotcha moment, I figured it out, I know what you did, it wasn't actually worth it. It was gonna cause much more stress and negative energy in my life to look backwards that I chose not to say anything to protect my business, to learn the lesson and move on. And here's what I have to say. I wouldn't necessarily do the same thing in a different situation. I mean, the person that stole all this money from me and damaged my business, they were in a different country. even though I could have hired legal counsel and I could have gone after this person, when I thought about the time, the energy, the just emotional cost of doing that, it was too expensive to pursue it. Sometimes. Sometimes your peace of mind is worth way more than the money that you would get by confronting something. And that's what I determined for myself. But here's the thing. There's a lot of cases for you personally and for me where the thing to do is to confront somebody. And there have been situations that I've been in the past where I did get a lawyer involved. what you need to do personally, and this is what I would recommend, is if you experience betrayal, whether it is from a friend or, , from a friend, or a spouse or a boyfriend or girlfriend or partner, or it is somebody in your business, you've got to ask yourself, , what's my goal here? My number one goal is protect my business, protect my peace, learn this lesson. What's in it for me? Am I trying to fix the person? Am I trying to make them wrong? Am I trying to repair the situation? Am I looking for a gotcha moment? Do I deserve to make this wrong or ? Do I need to go after them legally? And then you got to ask yourself, , what do I need to say for closure? And should I do this because it's going to make me feel confident? And there may be a time in your life where you have to hear yourself say out loud to the person that betrayed you, I know what you did. And I will not have you in my life because I will not surround myself with people who do this kind of thing. And I forgive you. I'm sorry. but you're not welcome back in my life as a friend, as a partner, you can just shut the door after that conversation. You can forgive somebody. You can call them out and you don't have to let them back in. You don't have to give them a second chance. And it comes down to what you want out of this. And if your goal is to stay in the relationship, to use this betrayal as the door that needed to get kicked open in order for you to face stuff that's not working. If you do decide to stay in the friendship or the relationship, you have to have a conversation. You have to explain that what they did and that what they're doing is wrong and how their behavior is impacting you. And if you don't know how to start that conversation, let me give you another tip. I need to apologize for something, which always kind of makes people feel a little , oh, what? You did something wrong, they're not going to be defensive? And then you say, , there's something that's been bothering me and I need to apologize that I didn't come to you sooner with this. And then you can also say, and , you might not even know that this is happening. I take responsibility that it's impacting me this way. And then explain how their behavior is making you feel. You're not attacking them. You're not telling them that you're not doing that. You're not telling them that you're not doing that. You're not telling them that you're not doing that. You're not telling them that you're not doing that. You're not telling them they did X, Y, and Z. You're explaining how it's impacting you. And based on their reaction, you will know whether or not this is somebody that you want in your life. If their reaction is, that's ridiculous. I didn't mean that. You're being too sensitive. Bye. That's what you do. You got all the information you need. But if their reaction is, I had no idea you felt that way. I feel terrible. Tell me what I can do. That's a friendship that you want to save. Does that make sense? , absolutely. Whenever I've shared anything with how any of their reactions made me feel or the impact it had on my life, they just simply aren't interested. . , there's all you need to know, ? And here's the second piece of transformation that I want for you. You ready? There are patterns in life that repeat. Until you get the lesson. And for me, the biggest lesson about this betrayal by this person in business is that when I look back through my life and I think, , what other relationships or friendships or colleagues, anything, what other relationships had the same feeling for me as this relationship? I can see a very similar pattern of the kind of person that I was drawn to or that was in my inner circle or that, , I was a really good friend with. And then all of a sudden I realized, oh my gosh, this person's mean and the gossip behind people's back. And now I'm scared because they're a friend of mine. And , I don't know how to get out of this. I could see a very distinct pattern. And maybe the lesson for you goes even deeper, which is not only when something's working or feels off. I think it's really important to say something, notice somebody's reaction. And that tells you whether or not this is a friendship to lean into or one to pull away from. But the other lesson could be are there particular personality types or relationship dynamics that draw you in that turn out for you to not be good for you? I feel I've learned the lesson because this is with my ex-husband and everything that happened. And I just, , he keeps reaching out to try and have a friendship with him. . . . . . . . . . We have a friendship going forward, but because of everything that happened, I'm not interested. Yes. And here's maybe your husband does need to have a conversation with them for his closure. Maybe he doesn't understand how this is impacting you completely. You see, you don't need to have a conversation with somebody in order to have closure. We often chase other people down, and we say we want closure, but what we're actually looking for is confirmation or we're looking for some sort of assurance. want to feel better you can do that for yourself if you're very clear about why this isn't working for you and what your boundaries are and it sounds to me you're very clear you don't need to have a conversation you've already had the conversation and their behavior in it told you everything you need to know that's the feeling because anytime i bring anything up about how anything's impacted me it just re brings up all of the old stuff again and it's just too hard i just have to let them all go and just let my life carry on and you also is there a request you need to make of your husband as my ex-husband is he oh your ex-husband excuse me he's he was friends with them he's not part of this really no he is it was the stuff that happened that ended my marriage oh with my best friend oh is he with your best friend he is he came out as bisexual he's with both of them wow that's a lot it was a lot and that's exactly why you don't need to have them in your life and you don't know you don't owe anybody an explanation you deserve peace it's just really good for me to hear that i don't need to resolve anything i can just move forward knowing in the peace in me that i don't want to have friendships with people who are not my friends and i don't want to have to be friends with people who are not my friends who i that they've got many beautiful new humans in my life and just experiencing of that kind of love and friendship from my new friends and my new boyfriend that's really beautiful wonderful that's great i'm proud of you've helped a lot thank you i appreciate you being here but you keep the credit because you did the work thank you very much for all you share you're welcome and what i need to say to everybody listening is that you've been broken up with or if you've got a friendship where the behaviors turn toxic or you've got something going on you don't need to have a conversation about it their behavior has told you what you need to know if you're still questioning it have the conversation in the way that i suggested where you apologize for withholding this you tell somebody how their behavior or lack of behavior makes you feel and then watch their reaction if they're caring and kind wonderful if they're not wonderful what to do which is close the freaking door on that relationship do not accept that behavior in your life period not from somebody that's not resourceful and not from somebody who's willing to do the work to repair this all we got to take a short break to hear a word from our sponsors but when we come back we have got a second person that is dealing with betrayal and this one is even more emotional you're going to hear from jen who is a very emotional person and he's going to be talking about the way that she wrote this initial question and i'm going to ask her to tell us a little bit more about that and then we'll get back to you when we return welcome back it's mel and i'm glad you're here because our next question today comes from jen and the reason why i invited jen on the podcast is because there was something about the way she wrote this initial question and she had written that me she too had one of the most difficult years of her life but she was having a really hard time giving herself credit for facing and i sense there was a lot more under the surface here jen i want to welcome you to the podcast can you start by just introducing yourself and asking your question again my name is jen and i am from pennsylvania i have my question is i have a lot of difficulty giving myself credit as you suggested that we do especially this past year which has been just extraordinarily painful how can i overcome that i love your question why has this last year been extraordinarily painful not getting into too much detail there was some betrayal that happened in my life and it's just affected every aspect of who i am i i question everything now did something happen to me when that happened and how i am now kind of just what was there but i found it because i had the ability to i worked with people who were i vegetable farmers those all things lack of family ties everything i thought i was everything i thought i could do it's all it's all just been ripped away and i can't i can't overcome it you can overcome it you won't at the moment and let me give you advice about betrayal and this is really hard to get and as somebody who has both been betrayed and who earlier used to be a crazy addresses and actually most recently with the proposal following jen's spouse however earlier in my life was somebody who was the betrayer, I can speak to both sides of this. And what I want to say, and this is the hardest thing to grasp, it has nothing to do with you. What that person did in your life has nothing to do with you. And it has to do with their pain. It has to do with their neurochemistry. It has to do with their coping mechanisms, their trauma, their dysfunction, their pain. It doesn't make it any easier when you're on the receiving end of it. But when you say and are able to just repeat, it literally has nothing to do with you. It has nothing to do with me. This is a very hurt and lost person who is coping with that hurt and that loss in an incredibly destructive way. But in no way, shape, or form does their bullshit determine whether or not I'm lovable, or whether or not I trust people, or whether or not I'm good enough. They have revealed, a very broken side of themselves, that they have chosen to escape, numb, deflect, all of it, instead of facing it in the mirror. And it's really hard because you got to go through a process of grieving what you thought it was in order to have yourself unhook from it. Because what you're actually grieving now, and I'm just going to, you haven't given me any details, but I'm just going to, , talk from my own experience. You're grieving the future that you thought was going to happen, and you're grieving the reality of what you thought was going on. And that's incredibly destabilizing. And you got to give yourself time, I'd say a year, to really just move through the anger, the pissed offness, the hurt, the how could they have done this? How could I not have seen this? How could they have lied? all of it. And then at some point, you're going to hit this saturation point, where you have soaked up much of the misery that you will no longer want to feel it. And the only thing that will help you, a sponge, squeeze that shit out of your being, is when you say, wow, I actually feel sorry for that person. I feel sorry that they're screwed up. I feel sorry that they're screwed up. That their only way to cope with that is to either cheat or lie or steal or whatever. Because it's easier than facing the truth. Some people are scared of disappointment or upset or pain, that they are willing to literally drug, smoke, drink, or fuck their way through life. And that's what I'm trying to do. I'm trying to make sure that I'm not just, , a drug addict. I'm trying to make sure that I'm not just, , a drug addict. I'm trying to make sure that I'm not just, , a drug addict. Because the momentary rush of dopamine that you feel when you snort cocaine or you have an orgasm or you're flirting with somebody in secret or you're stealing, that relieves you of the deep pain that you're feeling. That's why people do that. And you were hurt. You didn't deserve it. But I'll tell you what else. You don't deserve, and you shouldn't be, in a relationship with somebody who is not willing to face that shit. Who is not willing to heal with you. Who is not willing to do the work. And , , I'm being tough with you because this person already got how many years of your life? Fourteen. Yes. And what I want you to understand, is that, first of all, any relationship, in my opinion, if two people are willing to do the work, any relationship can come through and be stronger, even in the face of betrayal. No question. But only if both of you are willing to come to the table and do the work together. You, and I, are willing to do the work together. I'm willing to forgive, and the other person, to face their shit that led to this. And if they're not, then all you can do is grieve what wasn't, and grieve the future you thought you were going to have. And take a hefty amount of empathy to feel sorry for somebody, that this is who they are, as hard as it is and at some point to truly honestly be grateful that all this crap got revealed that you can move forward with somebody who's healthy and the somebody i'm referring to is you i that and one other thing even though this has nothing to do with you when you look across the 14 years there are probably things that you can see where you let slide or you didn't say what you're really i blame myself excuse me what did you say i blame myself when i when i look back and kind of assess all of those things i do find things that i have let slide then i blame myself for letting it go no it's just a lesson and sometimes lessons we learn easily and sometimes we need sledgehammers and this is a sledgehammer and as you move forward in your life whether you do on your own or you do working through this with somebody with somebody you're i want to get thisuisened and let's be real and if you replace somebody with somebody you're no one is going to eat this and then i want to pretend i've given him away but he has reached this Yongshan we've got something more to eat in between i have killed myself but i often don't wholly put myself on the one his feeling isn't the best thing it is we've always been phony but as long as you're Guide those around and you take what's wrong but that's a message to get people saying what's wrong we'll all be fine unravel the oldcharged And that's what you're learning from this. It's one of the thousand things that you're about to learn from this. And one other thing I want to tell you is I promise you the road ahead, you got the best years of your life ahead of you. You do. And I think that. I hope . I want to know that. I want to think that. It's just, then I get into my head and that's kind of where I live. What's the thing that you say that tortures you the most? That I'm not good enough. That it happened because I'm. Not good enough. Not pretty enough. Not thin enough. Not. All of it. How's that feel? It sucks. Do you want a different story? I do. Great. I'm going to give you one when we come back from the break. Welcome back. I'm Mel Robbins. And today we are coaching listeners who have experienced betrayal. And unfortunately. As you're learning, this is a topic that I have a lot of experience in. And we were just talking with Jen. And I was explaining the fact that one of the most important steps that you need to take is you've got to start telling yourself a different story about what happened. And here's one, Jen, that I want you to start telling yourself. It happened because he's an asshole who has a lot of trauma. Who doesn't want to face it and who's been avoiding it. And we also know who will likely. Do the same thing to the next person if he doesn't face it now. Because people who avoid. That hard things, the pain they're feeling. Or the trauma that they experienced when they were little. When people use avoidance as a coping mechanism. Guess what they continue to do. To avoid. And again, this is where it comes down to the fact that this betrayal. Has nothing to do with you. And I know that's hard to grasp. I really do. But I want you to start to tell yourself the story that this has nothing to do with me. This has to do with his shit. This has to do with him not having the coping mechanism to face his pain. And this is a wake up call. That's what this is. It has nothing to do with me. I do want to be clear that he is trying to own his crap. It's just me living in my head. And. I know that part of me knows that it's not my fault. That it's not that I'm not good enough. And all of the things that you said. It's just I'm a highly sensitive person. I'm an empath. I'm 88. all of those things. And I just. It's me trying to overcome those things for me. Then let me give you a different interpretation. And a different story. Because you two are trying to work together through this. . Great. And let me tell you why I think that's great. I don't know a single couple. That has gone through something horrible. And look, Chris and I have gone through horrible stuff. I don't know a single couple. Who spends time in therapy. And works through it. Who doesn't come out on the other side and say, I'm. I wish I hadn't worked on it. . But I do know a number of people. That have gotten divorced. That wish they had tried to work through it. And working through it matters. Not you can stay together. But it matters because if you don't stay together. You will be better. Co-parents and friends. And that's important. But the likelihood is if you're both willing to come to the table. And he in particular is willing to do the work. Then the odds are in your favor. And you will come through this stronger. the story I want you to tell yourself is this. What if. He did this because it was the only way he could stay in the marriage. Because he was feeling lost. And depressed. And whatever. That he. Was the one who didn't feel good enough. And it's not about you or the other person being thin or whatever else. That he was at a point in his life that he lost who he was. And he might as have been having sex with a frickin dinner plate for crying out loud. Because it's not about the other person. It's about him chasing an old version of himself. And if there's a dynamic in your relationship where he thinks he's failing or he thinks he's not good enough. That's what this is about. It's not about you not being good enough about him not measuring up for you. , I that story a lot better. And what else I a lot better that it was sex or an emotional connection and not heroin. I don't know. I'd kind of prefer the heroin I think. now you would. . Because we want to make this stuff about us. Of course it hurts you. Of course. It's devastating. And one of the biggest things you will learn from this if you allow yourself to. Is you'll learn that forgiveness only happens when you stop wishing things were different. And you'll learn that forgiveness is not about you. It's about you. And I think that's what I'm trying to say. I'm trying to say that. I'm trying to say that. I'm trying to say that. I'm trying to say that. I'm trying to say that. I'm trying to say that. I'm trying to say that. I'm trying to say that. I'm trying to say that. And that you can love somebody. Profoundly. And at the same time do shit that hurts them profoundly, and that through the act of understanding?! What happened? And really allowing yourself. To be in a space where you can hear how a guy is talking in his effort to get food and drink their diamonds in his part and you're not trying to be sent out of the me to go around alone in front of my Adele. And now it seems. And, , making mannerisms. I educate. how broken hurt lost whatever regretful whatever the feelings are you will truly connect with this person at a level you never have and this is not easy it will be worth it regardless of what happens and the more you tell yourself there's nothing to do with me this is about him being broken it's about him not measuring up it's about him needing to escape these feelings instead of dealing with them you and it takes a lot of courage on both of your parts to face this and if you guys can get to a point where you understand what happened and you keep the lines of communication open and you keep going to therapy you'll have a stronger marriage than 99 of the people out there you i keep hearing that's what i'm holding on to you gotta you gotta you gotta you're on the bridge i love using this metaphor that all change as a bridge and this happens to be one that's about as long as the chesapeake bay bridge and it's a suspension bridge which means when the winds pick up it blows and it will get better and it will get in the rearview mirror and by going to therapy together and by going to therapy together and by going to therapy together whether you stay together or it ends up not being what you want you will have such a better understanding of yourself and an understanding of what happened that you won't carry the resentment and the self-blame because it's not about you it has nothing to do with you in fact in the best of all scenarios what you're going to learn is that when somebody feels inadequate or that they've failed you it has more to do with how much they love you as screwed up as that sounds ask your therapist oh i will i don't know the details of what happened but i just am trying to tell you that if he didn't love you he would have left and affairs are people searching for parts of themselves that they feel they've lost and they're not and you don't deserve this and he's very lucky that you didn't just end it because you both have a chance to grow from this you and that's a gift even though it doesn't feel one you want to unwrap you're on the bridge just keep crossing the bridge and trust that when you get to the other side it's going to be way better than you can imagine i hope thank you're welcome you're gonna be just let yourself feel this dude you're welcome you're gonna be you're welcome you're gonna be that's what you gotta do and the thing that i also wanna that's what you gotta do and the thing that i also wanna tell you is when you get pissed write it to tell you is when you get pissed write it all out all out you're probably past the lashing out you're probably past the lashing out part and screaming part and screaming but maybe not i don't know but maybe not i don't know but it just allow yourself to be a little human it just allow yourself to be a little human and now that you feel understand you have it can you just it and now say good night and i see i'm not saying anything and now that you're kind of through that part, keep steering yourself toward, , how do I understand what happened? How do I create a space for healing for both of us? How do I forgive what happened? , that's the North Star, because whether you stay together, especially if you stay together, but even if it ends, I don't want you to carry this resentment or this lack of trust into what happens next. Heal this for yourself. And if the marriage is the thing for you, you'll know. Yes. Thank you for being honest with us and vulnerable. Thank you very, very much. Thank you. You have no idea how much you have just helped me change my life, thank you. You're welcome, and you're continuing to do it. And, , I think sometimes, too, this is happening because you're not supposed to have that kind of shit going on in your life. That as you level up your own standards for yourself, what's amazing is all of the crap that's not working comes to the surface. And that's because you're not supposed to have a life that's out of integrity. That's not what you want. That's not what you want. That's not what you want. That's not what you want. That's not what you want. That's not what you want. That's not what you stand for. And sometimes bringing things into integrity means a lot of shit comes to the surface, and you got to get a shovel. . You are going to be just fine. You're not only going to be fine, you're going to be happy. And you're going to be happy. You're going to be stronger because of this. And you're going to have a deeper capacity for love. And you are going to surprise yourself. . Oh, I have. I already have for sure. Name one thing that has surprised you about yourself or that you're proud of. Because I want somebody that's at the beginning of this kind of breakdown to hear something that's not true. Somebody further across the bridge. I am very surprised. I had no idea how strong I really am. And you hear that all the time. , you don't know how strong you are until it's time to be strong. honestly, if there is anybody, just believe in yourself. Just it's you're stronger than you think. You absolutely are. . Is there anything else that surprised you? . Has anybody surprised you as you've navigated this? Honestly, my ability to kind of try to be compassionate. I've always been, , of the mindset, , I won't say in a relationship where there was infidelity. It's just, it's not how I'm going to work. And then you're in the situation and it's completely different than anything you thought it would be. . But just to be able to overcome, I mean, get , I know I already said this, but just the being, I'm much stronger than I thought. And that's how I get through my days. And , I just, I grace, gratitude. I say that to myself all day long, just learning to show myself grace, finding things to be grateful for and keeping my head down and just keep going. Go to the therapy, do the hard work. . All of the things, grace, grit and gratitude. You're crossing the bridge in the fog, in a rainstorm. . And here's what I also want you to be proud of. You are compassionate because you have a very deep capacity to love. . And part of loving is also being able to accept and understand someone else. Now, that doesn't mean condone. That doesn't mean you're responsible for it. That doesn't mean that you're making excuses for it. But attempting to understand somebody else's pain and bringing compassion to something that, , you're not going to be able to do it. And that's what I love about it. . Just letting people know that some of these past or unforementioned things that somebody is dealing with even though their dysfunction profoundly broke your heart, that's an act of love. That's why you're going to be . I love you. Wow. Can we just take a minute and collectively send some positive energy and some gratitude at Sonia and Jen? I am just grateful. I don't even know, that's not even the word. I'm proud of them and I appreciate what it took to come and talk to me about this deeply personal thing. I mean, this is not easy stuff. This is what people are dealing with and not talking about. And I appreciate Sonia and Jen for sharing everything that they shared and being open to going even deeper than they thought they probably would. And if you had a light bulb moment, and I sure as heck hope you did, I hope that you. I hope that you will take whatever insight that you gained and you will find the courage and the confidence to apply the advice that rang true for you. And there may be somebody in your life who's going through something very painful now. And it's been very hard for you to figure out what to say to them. Don't worry. That's where your friend Mel Robbins comes in. I'm always here as your friend and theirs. I'll be here to give you a push, to share my experiences, my wins, my heartbreaks, that you're not alone. And I'll be here to help you. And I'll be here to help you. And I'll be here to help you. And I'll be here to help you. And I'll be here to help you. I'll also tell you the truth, and I'll probably give you a little bit more tough love than you're ready for. But that's why we do this podcast twice a week. It's not just for listening. It's for doing. Because at some point you're going to have to do something that scares you, or you're going to have to do something different to create a better life and the life that you deserve. And one more thing, in case no one else tells you, I'm going to be sure to tell you that I love you. And I believe in you. And I believe in your ability to face the really hard shit that goes down in life. To call people out or to silently, confidently, just close the fucking door and move on and learn the lesson. Because it's in doing these things every day that you create a better you. And you create a more meaningful life. A better life. A fun life. A trusting life. A life that you love. All righty. I'll see you in a couple days. Oh, one more thing. It's the legal language. This podcast is presented solely for educational and entertainment purposes. It is not intended as a substitute for the advice of a physician, professional coach, psychotherapist, or other qualified professional. It is intended for educational purposes only and is not intended to provide any personal or professional guidance or advice for any particular person. If you have any questions or concerns, please reach out to me at the email address on the screen below. Hey, it's Mel. Thank you much for being here. If you enjoyed that video, by God, please subscribe because I don't want you to miss a thing. Thank you much for being here. We've got much amazing stuff coming. Thank you much for sending this stuff to your friends and your family. I love you. We create these videos for you. , make sure. You subscribe. Mwah!