part of the healing process is the self-awareness. let me begin by saying this. One of the questions that I get asked all the time when people start realizing what shame is, is they ask me, am I ever going to get over this? Will I ever heal from shame? And what they're hoping I'll do is say, yes, on this date in 2020, you will be over your shame. And what they are really realizing though, as they get to understand shame is how deeply rooted it is, how much it affects every part of their life. And they begin to realize there's going to, this is going to be a lifetime journey that you have thousands of triggers. You have all kinds of things that get kicked into motion once you're triggered. And what you see when you start healing and growing is a bunch of different things. You get triggered less, first of all, and if you're dealing with the shame, once it's triggered, if you deal with it in a healthy way, then you don't get triggered as often in that same area. you'll start getting triggered less. And then if you're healing, the triggers become less intense, and then you're able to process through them more quickly. currently it could be that once your shame is triggered, you're wiped out for two days in your head and in all your dark places. As you heal and grow, you can begin to work on your shame. And what I'm trying to say is, if you're dealing with the work through stuff in five minutes, an hour, and you become kind of amazed at how quickly you get through stuff. it is possible to make lots of healing steps forward, but probably the journey will go on at some level, to some degree, for the rest of your life. But I don't want that to be discouraging, because as you start to feel the healing, you'll be surprised at how much better you feel overall. you will begin to experience benefits very quickly as you begin to deal with it. Part of what determines how long the journey is going to be is, how much shame is there in your life, number one, how many triggers do you have, and how safe are your relationships. You can't heal from shame in an unsafe environment. you need to have safe, people, safe environment, or else, if you're with unsafe people, you just keep getting shame messages. the better you're able to have safe people, the faster you can heal from shame. Next thing I want you to understand is this. The initial healing from shame is very real, but it's very fragile. Some of you might have this experience. You've been working on yourself, say you've been coming to Finding Freedom, React, and you're starting to feel better about yourself. You're actually starting to respect yourself and accept yourself, and you're feeling really good, and then you go and spend the day with mom. And you come there going, I didn't think I, I guess I never learned anything. I'm back to feeling crappy about myself. And the point is this. You grew, but that growth is fragile. It's new leaves on a brand new baby plant. And the slightest thing can destroy them. part of what you have to do in recovery is really set boundaries to protect that growth it can solidify and become stronger and stronger. that is just up front that you need to be aware of. , I want to give you the four steps of healing that we've talked about far. And you may not have realized I was throwing some of these in as we went along. In the first five talks, but over there, every talk, there's been an element of self-awareness. And what we focused on last week is that to heal from shame, you have to take this thing that's been operating at a subconscious level and bring it to the conscious level. you understand how you're triggered, what you do when you're triggered, then you can change it once you get it to that conscious level. self-awareness is the first thing. Second thing, two weeks ago, we talked about the lies we believe about ourselves, both about our value and about what gives us value. And now you begin to replace those lies with the truth. And we talked about that and what it means to respect somebody else and the different types of respect. We've talked about all of that. the point was this. In dealing with shame, there is a cognitive part. There's a replacing part. There's a replacing part. There's a replacing part. There's a replacing part. There's a replacing part. There's a replacing part. There's a replacing part. There's a replacing part. There's a replacing part. There's an emotional part and lots of that we're going to get to. The other thing that we saw is in your brain, you have a limbic system that has become a bad. It speaks a lot of lies to you based on how you feel. And shame is a negative feeling. And your limbic brain says you're not worth anything. You shouldn't respect yourself. You deserve to fail, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. But now you've got a cortex that disagrees with your limbic brain. you have a battle going on in your brain between your limbic brain and your cortex brain. And the goal of recovery is that your cortex brain trumps your limbic brain. when shame gets triggered, limbic gets fired up and it wants to trump your cortex. And what you're doing in healing is saying, shut up limbic brain. Here is the truth. I'm not listening to the distorted stuff you tell me. And it feels truth, but I know it's a lie. And now I'm going to respond and act on my cortex, not on my limbic brain. And then the other piece that we talked about is beginning to have positive affirmations about yourself that are the truth about your vision. Value about who you are. that's part of that cognitive piece. The third one that we've talked about with that is developing a healthy value system. shame says, I have no internal value. All my value comes from what I do or from my external world. And now what you have to do in healing shame is saying, I can't base my value on what I do or my external world, because what happens if that changes? And I'm no longer able to do it. I have to find my value in my internal world, my inherent value. And that all of these are a process. All of these don't happen overnight, but they are stuff that you begin to work on and you begin to experience the changes. getting the value system. Now, one thing I want to add to that is we talked about sometimes there's a health problem. And I want to talk about that. And I want to talk about that. And I want to talk about that. And I want to talk about that. And I want to talk about that. And I want to talk about that. Now, whatious breathing check. this is how the body works. Why does it work? It acts and helps puzzles. And what does it reliable? It helps you to find your health, here's how to think about this today. the first one that comes to your mind is to feel valuable. that's the definition of joints and it comes to a health problem. Tommy is saying. What happened to me? g我覺得resThank you煴Do itok? In this time, I feel most secure. I feel clear. I feel healthy now. Because your body isn't weak. No compressions, if I canれないatspischoI no longer I don't need to think I could do linked the level or急 justified. people pulled it away. there's something inside there that you need to I don't feel valuable I'll treat myself by beating myself up putting myself down cortex says no I have value I will treat myself with value even though I don't feel I have value you're acting your way to new healthier feelings you're saying I have value treat myself that way regardless of how I feel and that is the challenge in dealing with shame you are choosing to act on what is the truth even though you don't feel it's that way you're fighting your feelings by choosing to act by treating yourself with respect and that can be some of the hardest stuff to do treat yourself with respect bottom line is as you treat yourself with respect you start to feel more respect for yourself you start to feel you can require others that have to treat you with respect you don't have to put up with their disrespect and that creates even greater growth for you in dealing with shame those four we've kind of covered now I'm gonna bomb my way through a whole bunch of other ones some are going we're going to go to the next one to the next one it's a little bit more unique to the could go for a whole session on them. I'm giving you the Kohl's notes, but it's really key, important stuff. the next one is accepting yourself. Now, here's what I want you to understand. When I first started working in the counseling world 30 years ago, what was being talked about all the time was you got to love yourself. Low self-esteem was on everybody's radar and you got to love yourself. But what they were saying was you have to try to create feelings of love for yourself. And what I found in working with people with tons of shame, they couldn't stir up good feelings to themselves. if they went to a workshop and they said, look in the mirror and tell yourself you love you and feel all warm and fuzzy to yourself, they're going rolling their eyes going, who is this quack job that's running this class? Because I, can't stir up any positive feelings. And I said, for deeply shamed people, that does not work initially. Where they have to start is not try to get warm feelings to themselves. They have to start by saying, I accept me. I choose to accept the body I was given. I choose to accept the personality I was given. And what does shame say? I don't want to be the guy who's the first one to accept me. I choose to accept the other. I don't want to be the guy who's the first one to accept me. And what does shame say? I don't who I am because I think that's the reason I've been neglected and abandoned. I wish I wasn't a shy, quiet person. I wish I was the outgoing leader that was funny all the time. And you wished for a different personality. You wished for a different face and all those different things. You start by making a choice. I choose to accept this package. I choose to accept the way I was born. Now that is easier said than done because you've never done that before. And what's going to happen is once you start to want to get down on yourself because you're feeling your shyness and nobody's wanting to talk to you because you want to sit in the corner all by yourself. You go, what? I'm shy. Instead of seeing that as just a negative, I wonder if there's positives from being shy. And you think about it from a positive perspective. let me give you this. When I was young, I was super shy. I was super analytical. And I didn't that about myself because I didn't relate to people my own age. They wanted to talk about stupid things about the latest girl. I didn't that about myself. I didn't that about myself. I didn't that about myself. I didn't that about myself. I didn't that about myself. I didn't to talk about whatever it is that everybody was excited about. And I wanted to talk about deeper stuff, and none of them were interested. And I just didn't connect. And I wish that I was something different. And then at some point, I thought, what? I wonder if there's benefits in being this shy thinker. And I began to look at it from those eyes. And you realize I would never be effective at what I do today if I wasn't a shy thinker. I began to realize, being shy, being in the moment-making position, being a person, being in the moment-making position, Being shy has a lot of positives that outgoing people don't have. And those are the things that you begin to think about. , next one. Not only are you accepting who you are, you also need to accept your past. what happens with shame is I hate my upbringing. I wish I didn't have it. I wish I had a whole different set of circumstances. And you can stay in that place of I wish, I wish, I wish, or if only for the rest of your life, or you can come to a point where you say, I can't go back and change anything. instead of seeing it as all bad, I wonder what I could learn from it that would make me a better person. Instead of just being bitter and resentful about it, let's learn the lessons from it. You'll find you'll learn lessons from your past that people who don't have your past will never learn. And you will gain strengths from that they will never get based on their past. And at some point, you say, I accept me and I accept my upbringing. As crappy as it was, I choose to accept it. Third thing you have to accept, healing is a slow journey. And it is a messy journey. everybody that comes into recovery wants the silver bullet. That is going to be the magic pill that they take and they're fixed. And they never struggle again. I was talking with somebody today that works with people that are in kind of the most severe federal penitentiaries for the most severe crimes. They all want to get , not all, but many want to get as long as they don't have to work very hard at it. As long as it's easy. As long as it doesn't require much change. That's what they want. they all say, I want to get better. I just don't want to do the work of getting better. here's what I do with clients. This little graph. This is what growth in dealing with shame looks . You make some progress. You get triggered, fall flat on your face. What happens when you fall flat on your face? You walk around and say, I guess I didn't learn anything. I'm stupid. And you feed your own shame and you beat yourself up. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. But that's the normal response. eventually you pick yourself back up and you start working again and you start making more progress, get triggered, fall flat on your face. And that goes that for a long time. But what I want you to see is that the overall progression of the graph is you're getting higher and higher. You're growing. think of it this way. When you have a baby that's getting that one year old mark, and they take their first step, do you go, you fell on your face. You're a failure. You should be ashamed of yourself. No, you're applauding. Go, way to go, way to go. Get back up. Try that again. And you don't fault them. You don't judge them. You don't criticize them. You realize that to learn such an important skill walking, which I'm told takes several, several hundred muscles within the body to get all figured out how to stay balanced, that takes a lot of falling on your face. And what you're hoping is that over time, they'll fall less and less and walk more and more, and then they'll eventually run. That's recovery. You are learning a whole new set of skills that is using muscles and abilities and brain circuits that are brand new, that you've never used before. that. You're not going to get it perfectly the first time. If you don't accept that the journey's this, you are going to beat yourself up and feed your shame every time you fall on your face. And you will not progress very far. accepting the nature of the journey is important. Now, let me add one piece to this. The problem with complex trauma is that failure becomes something that the person says, the person sees as only bad. Failure never led to anything good, just to pain and punishment. But what was the actual design of failure? It was positive. It was to be an example that you could learn from. failure was to be turned into a positive. That was the design. But if you come from a background where failure was always bad, and always was painful, you're afraid of failure. And what you're doing in recovery is changing your thinking there and saying, I'm going to fall on my face. That's not the end of the world. That doesn't mean I'm a total failure. That means I now have something I can learn from. I don't repeat that again. And it turns into a positive learning experience. Number eight. And you're going to see these all begin to overlap a little bit. But you have to forgive yourself for what you've done in the past. And when you fail today, you have to deal with it, change, and forgive yourself. what happens for a child that comes out of complex trauma? When you do something wrong, there's no way to fix it. You get punished for it. You get thrown in your face. And you learn that if you fail, beat yourself up. Beat yourself up. Get down on yourself. That's how you were parented. That's how you now parent yourself. That feeds shame. Now let me take it a step further. You have done a lot of things that you're greatly ashamed of. Stuff that has hurt your children and created trauma in them. You made a lot of mistakes in your children. You made mistakes in your teens and twenties that you wish you could redo and take back. But you have to, with complex trauma, go back to the child who's living in danger that they cannot resolve. They cannot fix. They cannot get out of to a healthy place. What was their only solution? Fight, flight, freeze. Survival. The very tools needed to fight, flight, freeze. Lying, not trusting, wearing masks. They messed up your life. But don't punish the child for trying to survive. Don't punish the child for using the only tools they had available to survive. You can't go back and change that child's decisions. don't punish them. Don't punish yourself for those survival decisions. You can change them now. And you need to do that. But stop beating yourself up for the things you did to survive. That is the point I want you to get. Now let me take it further. Many people think of forgiveness as a feeling. A limbic brain thing. I'll feel or I'll forgive myself when I feel that I've paid for my crimes. guess when that's going to happen? Never. Because you'll keep beating yourself up which will lead to more failure. Which will lead to more beating yourself up, etc. It becomes a vicious cycle that is spiraling downhill. what you have to do is this. I choose to forgive myself. And what that means is if I fail or if I have a memory of a failure. Instead of going to the negative tapes in my head where I beat myself up. I say no, not going there. I forgive myself. I choose to change. I choose to learn from that and become better because of it. But I'm not going to go beating myself up. That's what forgiveness is in forgiving yourself. Absolutely essential if you're going to deal with your shame. Now the next two are tied together. Remember we said that shame is a child looking into the mirrors of the people in their life. And the people of significance in their life. Reflect back to them by what they say and do. The value of the child. Who the child is. if the child is neglected and abused and abandoned. What's being reflected back to them is you're a zero. You're not worth love. You don't have value. those are the mirrors of their life. But they're all distorted mirrors. what you have to do now if you want to heal your shame. Is you got to surround yourself. With more accurate mirrors. People that will reflect back to you. A more accurate picture of your value. Of who you are. That you are lovable. That you are significant. But then with that. You need boundaries with unhealthy mirrors. you might have to say I can't hang around with my mom for now. Because the growth and the healing is too fragile. And if I spend too much time with her. It's going to get mowed down and crushed. I'm going to need some boundaries. With the distorted mirrors of my life. You want to know that's one of the hardest parts. Of recovery for a lot of people. I know many people are still looking for it. And they don't even realize it. Even though they might be 30, 40 or 50 years old. They're still longing for mom and dad to validate them. every time they grow. Which is going to happen as you deal with your shame. Guess who they want to go tell about it. Mom and dad. mom and dad will go we're proud of you. Usually doesn't happen that way. And you go running to mom and dad. And you say I'm growing. Here's what's happening. And they'll think you're better than us. Do you? And they mow your back down. And you're crushed again. you have to realize. If I keep looking to them to validate me. I'm never going to heal beyond a certain point. I need boundaries with those kind of people. And it's usually family members. That need them the most. Until I get strong enough to deal with it. And I need to find healthy mirrors. Who give me good validation. And I need to learn to validate myself. boundaries with mirrors is crucial. that's not something you do internally. That's saying other people still influence my shame. And I have to have a system in place. To protect myself from the wrong ones. Next one. Connect with healthier people. Now I'm not just saying. Have healthier people as your mirrors. What I mean is this. Shame was caused by not being able to connect. At an intimate level with people. And you've concluded. That the reason people didn't connect with you. Is because you weren't good enough. It was your fault. And that creates the shame. A huge part of healing shame. Is connecting in a healthy way. With safe people. Do you want to know the fear of a shame based person is? I'm going to develop a relationship. And I'm going to start becoming more authentic. I'm going to take my masks away. I'm going to start to open up. And then you get to some doozy secret. And then you share it. And you go. Oh they're probably judging me. I can never face them again. And you go to that place. You want to know what usually happens when you do that? If you're with healthy people. They go. You go through that. I went through that. Wow it's good to have somebody that understands. And you go. I wasn't judged. I was loved. I was accepted. I'm respected. And you heal a little bit more. part of connecting with people. Is opening up. Not being judged. But then developing conversations and interactions. That go to the real stuff in your life. next one. We're flying along. Begin to learn about yourself. What does shame do to a person? You don't who you are. You try to become somebody else. Now when you start to heal. You go. I don't know who I am. I don't know if I'm outgoing. I don't know if I'm shy. I don't know if I'm funny. I don't know if I'm serious. I don't know who I am. Don't know if I'm good at sports. I don't know if I'm good at administration. Total blank. all the roles you played. all the masks that you wore. But you're not sure who you really are. Do things that help you find yourself. Do things that help you find that out. Take personality type tests. Read books on that. Begin to explore what interests me. Maybe I'll take guitar lessons. Maybe I'll try an art class. Maybe I'll try martial arts. Whatever. Try different things. To find out what you're good at. Now here's what you have to understand. What does shame do when you go to try a new thing? oh. What happens if I'm not good at it. And I look stupid. I better not risk trying anything. in order to get to know yourself. You got to push through shame. And risk failing and looking stupid. And moving out of your comfort zone. But as you do that. You realize nobody killed me. And I didn't die. And I actually grew from that. And you get more courage to keep doing it. Next one. Grieve your past. I taught myself. I talked about accepting your past. But that doesn't mean you're happy about your past. It means there's a lot of crap that you have to grieve. a couple things that I want you to think about. One of the things that you're grieving with shame. Is you didn't get a healthy childhood that you should have got. you're grieving something you never had. But you should have had. you've lost something that you've never had. But you've lost something you should have had. And part of what happens is people get to know about complex trauma. And their shame. Is they begin to realize how much their childhood affected them. And they start to go I wish I had a different childhood. I wish I didn't go through that. And then they start grieving what they didn't have. Secondly. You're grieving something that you should have lost. Secondly. You grieve the many losses that you did have. The loss of connection. The loss of certain friendships. The loss of certain things because of choices by family or yourself. there's a grieving part that is part of the healing process. Next one. You have to have a clean conscience. what we talked about in the first talk was this. Guilt is about what I do. Shame is about who I am. The problem with complex trauma is when you do something bad. They say you are bad. they blend guilt and shame. And what happens now when you fail. You do something morally wrong. You tell a lie. You cheat. Whatever. It feeds your shame. And you walk around saying not only did I fail. I'm a failure. And it feeds your shame. if you do something morally wrong and your conscience bothers you. Clean it up away. Because if you don't. It's going to keep bugging you. And it gradually is going to pull you into deeper shame. that becomes an important piece. Next one. Service. And what I want to say about this is for many people. Service is important. And it's important in finding out what I'm good at. What I can offer people. And it helps me heal. To realize I have something to offer. But for some people it's very dangerous. Because if you got your validation as a child. From helping everybody. And you were the perfect little servant around the house. And that's where your validation came from. To step back into a service role. And it messed you up. Because it could pull you back into looking for validation. Which comes a drug. if that was part of your validation growing up. Be very careful as you get into service. Don't go there unless people in your life think you're ready for it. Because it's very easy to get there. And then once you're there. You stop working on yourself. And all that you're doing. And then if you're struggling. You're afraid to say anything. Because now everybody's looking up to you. And it becomes a disaster. Next one. Many people find there's a value in healing shame. In the spiritual thing. In a higher power. In a new belief system. That is a better definition of happiness. Of value. Of what makes life work. All of that can be important. If you do have or a higher power. That becomes for you a mirror. That you believe is the most accurate mirror in the world. And that tells you the truth about yourself. Better than anybody else. that one is important. Next one. Humility versus humiliation. Now here's what I want you to understand. A lot of people. Cultures. Religious people. Have defined humility as shame. Now I want you to understand that. If you go to many places. And ask them to define humility. Guess what they'll say. You're worse than everybody. You never walk around and say I accomplished something. You see yourself as less than. And if you ever feel good about yourself. Shame on you. You're proud. You're not. Shame on you. You're proud. You should be walking around saying I'm a nobody. I'm no good. And that's how they define humility. You realize that is the wrong definition. And if you're going to heal from shame. You need the definition of humility. And the definition of humility is this. You see yourself accurately. And what does it mean to see yourself accurately? I'm not better than or worse than anybody. You're not a better person. You're not a better person. You're not a better person. You're not a better person. You're not a better person. You're not a better person. You're not a better person. And you need to understand that. Humility is a human being. Humans were a level playing field. We all have equal value. Secondly, humility says I want to learn. I want to keep growing. I don't want to get locked into this place. And humiliated was terrible. Humility is totally different. It is seeing myself accurately. It is being open to change, to growth, to learning. And that is absolutely essential if you're going to heal shame. Now the next one is inner child. Now we spend a lot of time at React. Let me just say a few things. Inner child for a lot of people, they go, Oh, that's hokey. That's just weird. What are you going to ask me to do? here's how I talk about it. I think everybody that I deal with from complex trauma, if I say, do you still sense there's a little child in you somewhere? They all agree. And then I go, let's just focus on that little child inside of you, which is a younger you. What emotions is that child? What is that child feeling? And they'll go, wow, they're hurt. They're sad. They're angry. They're full of fear. They got tons of shame. And they hate themselves. I say, . that child, that inner you, that little you, has nothing but negative emotions. How does that child look physically? They got their head down. They're curled up in a fetal position. They can't look at people in the eye. They can define and describe that child. How does that child feel about you, the adult? Ooh, he doesn't trust me. Why? Because I abandoned that child. I hated that part of me. I didn't want anything to do with that part of me. I was impatient with that part of me. I was embarrassed by that part of me. that child feels abandoned by you and doesn't trust you. But that child is you. It's a part of you. healing from shame is taking that part of you that you've rejected and been embarrassed by and accepting it and nurturing it that it feels loved and it can heal and become part of the adult you. that's what this is about. then I say, . Let's just say one of your biological children spilled their milk or fell off their bike and tore a hole in their brand new pair of pants. What would you do to that child as they're crying and angry at themselves? You would hug them. You'd say, it's . It's just things, et cetera. You would nurture them and comfort them. I go, what happens if your little child fell off their bike and messed stuff up? I would be in that child's face, criticizing them, calling them down. here's what I want you to understand. You parent your biological child differently than you parent yourself. You're loving and nurturing and comforting and understanding to your biological children because what shame-based parenting did to you. But yet when you parent yourself, you still use shame-based parenting. People don't grow from shame or heal from shame until they parent themselves in a loving, nurturing way. And that starts with that little part of you that you've always been embarrassed by. let me just read this. It came out recently. I found it. It says, Toxic shame has its root in childhood, abandonment, abuse, and trauma. And you're familiar with all that. As such, feeling better will almost always go back to accessing your childhood self, the very part of you that was confronted with the trauma in the first place. Learning how to interact with and care for your younger self is called inner child work. And there are a number of reasons why this practice is powerful. Firstly, inner child work helps you access feelings that you have repressed and disassociated from in an attempt to protect yourself as a child. By re-experiencing these emotions, you'll be able to release them from your body and mind and generate deep healing. you connect emotionally. Secondly, inner child work is tremendously insightful and revealing. Often some of the most important questions you've carried consciously or subconsciously are answered while doing inner child work. And thirdly, inner child work is learning self-compassion in action. When you learn how to re-parent your inner child, you develop a deep, strong connection with yourself, which has a ripple effect on the rest of your life. what's inner child work? It's learning to re-parent yourself, learning to parent yourself with compassion, learning to stop beating up and rejecting and abandoning yourself. Final point, number 19. Be patient. It takes time. If you forget what you are doing or start playing something else, then losing it is the same as breaking up with yourself. I love that. There are three QR-Codes of finality and 10 other known types. One is fine and cinco is usual. I them both, but they both have a lot of pressure on me. You get 들어가ing, stress, Airspeed, baby time, loneliness, pregnancy, stress.