same thing. I hope it doesn't get as focused this week, but I have felt the need to include in this anger series this topic of abuse because many of you have experienced it, and my concern is a lot who have experienced it haven't yet processed it, they've grown from it. They're still kind of stuck, afraid to go back and look at this very painful part of their life. I want to begin tonight by just asking a very simple question. Why is it that some people become abusive? And it's an important question to ask, and there's two very critical pieces in answering that. number one is that everybody who's an abuser has a lot of shame. That is almost a given in my mind. what happens with shame, which comes out of complex trauma, is when mom or dad abuse me or neglect me or abandon me, the child concludes it's my fault. It's because I'm not good enough. I must be a bad person. your whole sense of identity is shaped to be a negative. What happens with people with that is nobody to live just walking around hating themselves and feeling that. And people compensate or respond to shame in a variety of different ways. After this anger series, we're going to do a whole series on shame to really develop that and explore that. And just to give you a heads up, it'll be heavy, but I hope a very healing series for you. But what happens with that is that people compensate by going to I'm better than everybody. And then what happens with that is they go, my needs are more important than everybody else's as . you get the formation of a narcissist. And then there's a fear that they don't want to acknowledge that they deny. And that is deep down, they still believe that you wouldn't want to stay with me if I gave you a choice. That you would probably find somebody better than me. the only way you're going to stay with me is if I control you. you can see in there, you have an abuse element developing. Because if you rebel against my control, then I'm going to have to use abuse to try to regain control. And the other piece with shame is shame, though people might not be aware of it or acknowledge it. Shame has a lot of impact on you. And that's why I'm going to talk about shame. Shame has a huge anger component. You're angry at yourself, you're angry at the world, you're angry at life, and you lash out at people who are the closest to you. that becomes the formation of an abuser. A lot of shame. But you have to look at the flip side. And that is why do certain people stay with abusers or get attracted to abusers? And the answer is, they have the same shame. And deep down, they respond in a different way. And they go, nobody would ever love me a lot for who I am. I have to become content with getting a few crumbs of love once in a while. That's probably the best that I can do. if I'm in a relationship where I'm abused, but I get love once in a while, I'll just have to put up with that and accept that because that's the best I'm going to get. you get the two sides of shame that get attracted to each other and end up in a relationship. And both are necessary to keep the relationship going. Do you realize if the person who takes the abuse and says, I'm content with a few crumbs, they could have left many, many times, but they stay there. And the question is why? And it's the shame thing. Only the flip side of it. The flip side of the response to shame. The next thing goes this. I work with addicts every day. And the question I often want them to consider is, if you look inside of yourself, you are a whole bunch of desires and hormones and chemicals and needs. And those needs and desires and drives are all in competition with each other. you got a desire for something. You got a desire for food, for sex, for relationships, for position, for power, all in competition. ? In a healthy person, there's one drive, one need that trumps everything else, and that is love. I will have a sex drive, but never to the point where it violates love. Love will trump that. What happens in an abuser is things begin to change. They trump love. And as soon as something begins to trump love, you can become an abuser. And we all have the potential to be abusive because we all struggle every day with competing desires. And sometimes they do trump love. We get selfish. An abuser is the things that consistently trump love are there all the time. And that becomes the main part of love. And that becomes the main part of their life. Love still pokes out once in a while, but other forces are the more powerful forces in their life. let me give you a couple examples. if a person has this sex drive, it can become a lust thing. If it trumps love, guess what you have? I want my sex drive gratified. I don't care if I hurt you. now you get sexual abuse and rape. That is where the sex drive has trumped love. And then sex then becomes abusive. It becomes using of other people. Second one, greed. We all have this desire. I want money. I want position. And what happens if your desire for money trumps love? I will steal from you. But if it's healthy, I will love will always win over you. I will love you. I will love you. But if it's not healthy, I will have a desire for money. And I will never violate you. I will never use you or steal from you. Same as lust for power. Think of image. If you grew up in a home where image was more important than anything else, when you went out in public, you knew that mom and dad weren't really loving you. That was all fake. But you had to keep an image. And if you didn't maintain the image while you were in public, the image while you were out there in public, you got it when you got home. Because what your parents were saying is, my image is more important than loving you. if you don't maintain my image, I will hurt you. it overpowered love. The same is true with resentments. If we let them take over, they will begin to overpower love. I can have a hurt, be hurt by somebody else, and be angry, but if I'm healthy, I will not ever use my anger in a way to hurt you. Love will win. I will be respectful. I will work my anger out in a loving way. But if I give in to resentment, I want to hurt you. I don't care about love anymore. Then shame. If you think of being with an abusive person who's got lots of shame, what happens is if you ever, if you ever, expose in public their weakness, or make them look bad, you're going to pay for it. Hiding shame is their highest priority. And you can take comfort, ease, control. If those are your priority that overpowers love, you will end up being abusive. if you get all kinds of those things, then you become even more likely to become abusive. , if anything trumps love, and that thing becomes threatened, I become abusive. that's the underlying forces. part of why I want you to think about this in these terms, is some people's response to people who are abusive is, just stop doing it. As if that's supposed to make them just stop doing it. The reality is, they can't stop doing it till they deal with their shame, and they deal with their shame, until they get those other things that have trumped love, to be under love. And that doesn't happen overnight. dealing with abuse, is not just quitting, it is dealing with deep, deep issues that go back a long way. And for most people, dealing with those issues is a gradual, slow process, but it is absolutely essential. The next thing, that I want you to realize, is the more things that you have in your life, that trump love, the more of a narcissist you are. Because what narcissism says, is my needs, my priorities, trump you every time. And that is again, the subject of these competing priorities, and whether we reign them in, or give them power, because as soon as we give them power, over love, we become a narcissist who abuses. those are two key underlying things, as to why a person becomes an abuser. Second thing, what characterizes an abuser? , how can I spot one? Now, let me just say this up front. I can go through this list, and I believe there's 19 things in this list, and you can know this all in your head, and you can go and fall in love with a jerk, and ignore everything I say. You can go, he's got all 19, but I'm still going home with him. just knowing this list, doesn't stop you from choosing an abuser. You have to deal with your shame stuff, before you have the strength to resist this list. , first thing, is abusers don't come and show their true colors on day one. They come wearing a very crafted, crafted mask. And they are great at being a salesman, and fooling you, and selling you on a fantasy, phony product, and making you think it's real. And part of the journey in spotting an abuser, is not getting sucked in by the salesman, waiting long enough until that mask slips a little bit, and you see the true colors, and then you go, nope, not going any further in this relationship. they start charming, and they can build up your self-esteem. They sense you have shame, and what do they do in their salesman role? They tell you how wonderful you are. They tell you how much they adore you. They want to spend every minute with you. Now understand this, that's only for the first few months. Then after that, that begins to change. The second thing is, they will try to rush you in the relationship. You're saying, I got to go slowly here to see their true colors. They go, I can't let them go slowly, because my salesman act only lasts long. I got to rush it here, and put pressure on them, and usually the thing that they lean on, to try to get you to speed stuff up, is sex. If I can get them in bed, and we have great sex, then I can get them to speed things up. what they are actually doing, is grooming you, and what we mean by that, is they are breaking down your natural caution, and your natural hesitance to trust somebody new. They're breaking that down, to get you to trust too early. And that's what we call grooming. Once they start to get you, and you're starting to get, you're starting to show interest in them, they will then begin to try to isolate you, from your other supports. they want to be the only person in your life, that carries influence with you. And if they see your parents still carry a lot of influence, and friends carry a lot of influence, they will begin to try to isolate you from them. Now they won't come up away and say, your parents are jerks, your friends are jerks, I want to dominate. They go, why do you need them? You've got me, we're great together. We help each other. We don't need those other things. And you hearing that, and you get sucked into that. that has a bigger thing of control. You'll see them more and more, wanting to control everything in your life. Your activities, your time, who you see, when you see them. Control begins to take over. They want to check your phone, check your Facebook. All of that control just keeps going up and up. Then you'll see jealousy going up and up. at first they won't reveal jealousy, but jealousy becomes the beginning of the mask starting to slip. Because that will show how angry they can become, how controlling they can become, and that begins to happen. Then disrespect comes. Disrespect will start to happen. at first in the salesman role, they sound they respect you more than anything else in the world. But once the jealousy and control starts to build, they start taking shots at you. Put downs. Things that make you feel stupid. Things that make you feel a burden. That you're lucky that they're patient with you. And then that can begin to go into public, public things that they say around other people where they put you down in front of your friends or your family. that begins to happen. Manipulation, emotional abuse. they turn often into little wee boys and girls who pout, have temper tantrums, give you the silent treatment, withhold affection from you. All part of a manipulation game. Next characteristic. They don't respect your boundaries. They want you to respect their boundaries, but they think they can do whatever they want as far as your time, your phone, showing up, taking all your time. Your no doesn't mean no to them. Lack of respect for boundaries. They will get more and more critical. again, let me say, you're not going to see this till you endure or get past the salesman stage. Once you get past that, these things start coming up. Now the problem with the critical, it will get to a point where it doesn't matter what you do, it will never be good enough. that then means they will criticize everything. Everything, nothing will please them. They will become a victim. not just a little boy or girl, but now they blame everybody for their problems. They blame others for their decisions. They don't own any of their own choices. if they lose their job or they lose their temper, it's your fault, it's somebody else's fault, it's never their fault. Double standard. I can go through your phone, you can't go through mine. I can get angry, you can't. I can cut you off from your friends, you can't cut me off from my friends. you'll see, double standard more and more. Then you'll start to see inconsistencies, mood swings. Happy, angry, in a heartbeat. We're having a great day together till you're being punched in the face in a heartbeat. that begins to happen. in the salesman mode, you got a consistent sales job. The mask never fell off. Now you're starting to see it slip regularly. And their true self comes out. Now the danger for people is this. They think the sales job was the true them and the slipping of the mask that's coming out, they think that's the exception. Oh, they're just having a bad day. And you make excuses for them. The reality is the sales job was the mask. Now it's slipping and you're seeing the real. But that is hard to believe when you've had a month or two of a great sales job. Then you find them emotionally unavailable. You try to connect. You try to work things out. And they're just not doing it. And you feel more and more detached, more unable to connect all the time. Next, they use love as a tool and a weapon. in the beginning in the sales job time, they acted they loved you, but it was just really they were using love to use you. It wasn't a genuine love. Now they can withhold love to get you coming running. They can even say that when they punish you, that's them loving you. they try to make pain equals love or hurt equals love. love gets very distorted and it gets very cruel. love gets very distorted and it gets very cruel. love gets very distorted and it gets very cruel. Hypersensitive. Again, the little child, the little boy, you try to give any feedback and they just get defensive. They begin to think you're just criticizing me, out to get me. Everything is bugging them. And what they're doing is basically they're , the whole world's against me and I'm an army of one. And now you're against me too. And they polarize everything that way. And they polarize everything that way. And now you're against me too. You begin to feel that you have unrealistic expectations of you all the time. You begin to feel that you have unrealistic expectations of you all the time. You begin to feel that you have unrealistic expectations of you all the time. They always expect you to read their mind, to do everything perfectly, to communicate perfectly, all of that. And it's just the bar is unattainable. Insincerely repentant. They vow they'll never hit you again. But I want you to realize this, they will, unless they deal with that deep stuff. Just saying I will never do it again and promising and being full of remorse in that crisis moment doesn't mean deep change has happened. what you're looking for is not just words, but are they willing to do deep change and reach out for help around their deepest issues. Intimidating and threatening will happen more and more, as you begin to realize their mask has totally slipped. This is the real them. I think I better leave. Then they can threaten you to kill you if you ever leave them. Final one, they lump together morally wrong behavior with human limitation. if you spilled the milk, that's just as bad as telling a lie. If a child colors outside the lines, they make that as a moral rule. A failure. if you come home and the supper's not quite perfect, they make it sound you just cheated on them. They lump everything into a moral failure. If the house is a little bit messy, it's you cheated on them. And everything gets made into a moral thing. 19 things there. You may have just checked off every one of your ex's characteristics. Hopefully you'll pay attention the next time Prince Charming shows an interest in you. Next question. We've kind of covered some of it. Why do people stay? I have had many people come to me with bruises on their face saying I'm never going back. They move out, and guess what? Two weeks later, they're back. And I go, what are the dynamics that cause a person who's got bruises all over to go back for more of the same? two categories here. The first for many, and what I want to say, big picture with this, I will not try to oversimplify this and make it look the person who stays is a failure or I'm shaming them in any way. I've been at this long enough to know that it is not easy to leave. There are all kinds of forces at work, and it's a very complicated, complex issue. I hope I can communicate it in a way that you realize you're not being judged, but you're being understood. number one for many people is there's a huge fear of what the abuser will do if they leave. The safety issue. Will he stalk me? Will he come after me? Will he hurt me? And that is a significant fear. Secondly, there's a lot of guilt. If I leave, they'll fall apart because all they have is me. And I'm afraid if I leave, they're going to go into a huge relapse and they're going to mess up their life. They need me. And there's a lot of guilt that a lot of people have. And the abuser can often say to you, you're the only one I have. You're the only one who gets me. You're the only one that understands me. I can't get sober without you. That sounds great, but that's a lie. They can get sober, and there are other resources that they need to tap into. You cannot be their higher power. That will not work. A big practical thing for many people is the children. How will this affect the kids? Let me just say this. If you stay together with an abuser, you hurt the kids. If you separate from an abuser, you hurt the kids. The kids are hurt both ways. The question is, what hurts them the least? And I would say what hurts your kids the most is you staying. Because at some point in time, your kids are going to resent you that you stayed in that environment and didn't take them to a safer environment. you might think you're protecting the kids from going through a divorce and all the mess of that, but they can get over that a lot more than if you stayed in the problem. But it is definitely a consideration. A big one, money. How will I live? Do I need to get a job? I don't know if I can afford to be on my own. I don't have enough to get my own apartment, et cetera, et cetera. I'm going to come back to that because those are very practical, very practical things that need to be considered. , how do people rationalize staying? It's the same question. It's just a little different perspective. here's what I've heard over the years because I've had many people who come to me for counseling who have stayed. And they say, but he has such a good heart. I just, if they just get that loved enough, then that good heart will come out. And I go, how's that working for you far? They might have a good heart, but the issue is there's things that trump that good heart. And you're not able to help them deal with those things. And that good heart is not going to come out as long as they stay with you. Next one, who will help them? All they have is me. We've talked about that. Third one, I'm afraid they're going to go heavy into addiction. And I just would feel guilty. Bottom line, you cannot keep them sober. You might be able to delay their heading into deeper addiction, but they're headed that way now because they're not liking themselves as an abuser. They're totally discontent, full of anger. And they're heading there. You can't prevent that by staying with them. All they're doing is dragging you with them. And what you have to realize often, is somebody else might be able to help them, but I'm not the person. I'm not strong enough to do that. And I have to get myself strong enough first before I can help anybody else. that has to be my focus. Another common one is this. I'm planning to leave them, but I'm going to wait till after we have our vacation together. Or I'm planning to leave them, but we've got to get through Christmas this year, then I'll leave them. what I've seen with them is three years later, they're still saying, I'm going to leave them after this. that doesn't hold water after a while. It becomes a way of procrastinating what you need to be doing. If you wait for the perfect circumstances, you may never leave them. there's going to be times, there's going to be an element where you leave them, and it's not a perfect set of circumstances. But to stay with them makes even worse circumstances. , now let me take you to some other reasons why people don't leave. And I'm going to take it a bit deeper for you. I want you to think again of our limbic brain versus our cortex brain. Do that abusers and those abused both tend to live in a limbic brain, which is the emotional brain, the emotional brain. life is decided by how do I feel. I will do something if I feel it. what happens in a limbic brain? You go, you just beat me up, I hate you, I'm out of here. Limbic brain just made a decision. Two weeks later, oh, I miss them much, I love them much, I'm back. If you let the limbic brain make decisions based on how you're feeling in the moment, it's going to be a yo-yo relationship. And you will never leave them. the point is this. The limbic brain doesn't look to the facts to make a decision. It looks to how I feel to make a decision. The cortex brain says, yes, I miss them. Yes, there's a part of me that still loves them. But the facts are they've got deeper issues that if they don't deal with them, they're never going to change. That's the facts. And I'm not the one to help them deal with it. I've tried. They've got to get outside help. That's the facts. I'm not going to let my emotions cloud my decisions. I know what the thing to do is regardless of how I feel on any given day. the cortex has to come into play if you're going to leave an abuser. If you stay in your limbic, you set yourself up, to never leave or to leave and keep coming back. Next thing is the shame. I want to give you a different angle on this. What shame is, is others didn't respect me as a child, now I don't respect myself. if somebody abuses me, I think I probably deserve it, or I think I can't do better than this, but I'm never going to stand up for myself. the point is this. Until you respect yourself, you're not going to require anybody else to respect you. If you don't respect yourself and you don't stand up for yourself, why should anybody else respect you? They're just treating you how you feel about yourself. And you're only going to stand up and say no more to an abuser until you respect yourself. Now let me go back to limbic and cortex. Cortex brain says, I don't feel a lot of positive feelings for myself, but I know I have value, I will stand up for myself even though I still feel unimportant. I will treat myself with respect even though I don't feel it. The limbic brain says, I don't feel respect for myself, I don't respect myself. I never will respect myself because I never feel respect for myself. you've got to switch to the cortex and say, I don't feel respect for myself. I don't feel respect for myself. you've got to switch to the cortex and say, I have value. I'm worth fighting for. I'm worth setting boundaries for. I'm worth getting healthy. And I'm going to start standing up for me. Now that initially will feel selfish. But that is not. That is healthy. That is finally giving yourself the respect that you deserve because of the value inherent in you. The longer you stay in an abusive relationship, the worse your shame gets. The lower your self-esteem gets. , a couple more things. Practical guidelines. What I say to clients all the time is this. Don't leave an abusive relationship till you're ready to stay gone. Until you're ready to enforce it. Don't say, I'm out of here and two weeks later you're back. think through a very careful plan about what you need to do in order to stick to that I'm gone. Think through your finances. Think through your safety. Think through the kid's situation. All of those things come up with a thought out plan when you finally say it's done, you're going to enforce that and stick to it. That is essential because if you go back, what have you just trained the abuser? You've just trained them that your no doesn't mean no. You've trained them that if they say no, they can manipulate you over time to get you back and the next time they're going to try harder and it's going to be harder to enforce your boundary. think it through carefully. Third thing, be prepared for backlash. A narcissist doesn't somebody saying no to them. A narcissist doesn't somebody saying, we're done, I don't want to be around you. That makes them look bad. they can go on the attack. Be prepared for that and that's got to be part of your plan. I'm going to stick to my guns even though World War III erupts. And then be prepared for a variety of emotions that you're going to go through once you end it. Yes, you'll be angry for a while but then you're going to miss them. And then you're going to feel love for them. Then you're going to feel guilt. Then you're going to be confused. And then you'll go through a time of grief. You're not just going to be angry constantly, you're going to have a whole roller coaster ride of different emotions. Be prepared for that. Two final things. And these questions I get asked all the time. let's say you're in an abusive relationship and you say it's done. But they say, I'll go for help. I'll go to REACT. I'll get counseling. Should I wait for them? That is a very tricky question. Here's what happens. If they go to REACT knowing that you're going to wait for them and they go through REACT and they come back, how do they did it for the reasons? Did they do it for you or did they do it to get you back? Or did they do it for themselves or did they do it just to get you back? you're not going to ever know that they're going to do it for themselves until you're out of the picture. As long as you're still in the picture, you're always going to wonder are they truly sincere in their desire to change? Or is this another smoke screen to make it look they're trying to get help when they're really just trying to reel me back in? The next one, if you end it, is it ever possible one day to get back together? I would say in very, very rare occasions. Usually, once you would try to get back together, it's too easy to go back to the old behaviors where you left off. And you all know each other's baggage. And it just is such a difficult thing. what I say to clients is this, you might not feel that you can say it's done forever. I get that. But at least agree that it's done for a long period of time. Give yourself a year at least. Then maybe in a year your feelings will have changed and at that point you can say it's done forever. You can't say that now, let's do it in a two-step process. And let's just get through a year of this is done and then see where you're at. if you're in a relationship with a person that's beginning to show those characteristics, I really hope that you can say, I'm worth fighting for and protecting. I want to end this before it gets really nasty because I know where this can go. And it's probably where it will go. I hope that gives you a little bit of practical stuff. That's the end of part one. We're going to have Melissa, Reagan and Bruno come on up. And sing again. Then we're going to go into the. I want to take the part and this anger series in a little different direction tonight, which might surprise you, but I actually want to talk about . And what I have found over the years of working with people with complex trauma who come out of families that produce complex trauma is that often they see as being kind of their parents. if their parents were unavailable, neglectful, distant, they kind of picture as being that way. If their parents were angry and abusive, they kind of picture as an angry . And that has a profound effect on how they approach . ? Second piece with this is I would think is. I've seen as people decide I want a relationship with , one of the first things that they have questions about and are very confused about is . they go, do I cross myself? Do I have to a certain way? Do I have to get on my knees? Do I have to end in ' name? Do I got to make sure I go on a certain order? And they get themselves all in a tizzy and a knot about how to . And then they hear some wacko who says they got to do it a certain way then they feel all guilty and must be disappointed in me. And it just becomes a very difficult topic for them. I want to talk about from those two vantage points. And I hope that it just helps you get some insight and helps you in your own journey. I want to say in Matthew 6 is written, is where the 's is recorded. And a lot of 12-step groups still end by saying the 's together. Many of you grew up in school saying it and it's one of the most -known prayers in the world. What people don't know is before he starts the 's , he talks about the abuses of or the dangers people have when they start looking at in their life. And what you're going to see is that is going to address the very things that I've talked about up front and it'll hopefully be refreshing. misuse number one is people use as an image thing. you might have a person who gets all pious when they and they talk in a little different voice and they use different words and they act super spiritual and you go, whoo, that is some super . And it's all based on how they . And then they can tell you, I for an hour every morning. And you go, wow, I am impressed with this person. And what? They may be a total hypocrite. And the first thing says is this, when you , don't be the hypocrites who love to publicly, on street corners and in the synagogue where everybody can see them. the religious leaders of that day purposely went to the busiest street corner of town and prayed loud. everybody would stop and go, wow, look at that person. It was all to feed their ego. When you , go away by yourself, shut the door behind you and to your Father in private. And remember he's not saying you should literally go and get in a closet and make sure nobody sees you. He's talking about your heart attitude. That your heart attitude in is this is not being done for spectators. This is being done to communicate with . that becomes the heart thing. that's abuse number one. But the second one is the main one he talks about. And it really brings in talking about tonight do you realize that grew up in a crop in a complex trauma world and it was a shame-based world that the predominant belief in all the world religions at the time of was that was a distant angry being therefore the purpose of was to manipulate that that's an angry who doesn't want to give you anything he just wants to punish you how do you get him to give you good things and not punish you use to manipulate them they developed all kinds of things about how to to get to give you what you want doesn't that sound today a little bit a lot of churches sadly today has become nothing more than how can you manipulate to give you what you want and I can get really worked up at times around this abusive that I see in churches today because it is prevalent here's what says when you don't babble on and on as the pagans do they think their prayers are answered merely by repeating their words again and again do what I hear sometimes today is keep asking keep asking badger with the same request and then he'll give it to you that's what he's saying don't do and then he says don't be them for your father knows exactly what you need even before you ask him he is saying what's the point of it shouldn't be just a shopping list where you say give me this to this and this he already knows what you need you don't need to report a shopping list but that is what he has become the focus in many churches around let me give you some of the things they use today to tell you how to manipulate they will put it in terms of how to have authority and how to have power in and it sounds great but for many people it's still seeing as a disinterested deity that you somehow have to cajole and they're giving you just these nice things but I can take out all the Kubbr fans the support for you and kind ofines the you what you want number one is they take john 14 that says says you may ask for anything in my name and i will do it and what they say is you have to in name if you listen to 99 of christians today when they they end their prayers by saying in name amen do you realize that's not what was saying here do you not know what it meant to in name it was the son in the son's name to the father if i was a friend of the son and i wanted to make a request to the friend's father the son's father i wouldn't go and say give me something that your son would never want but i'll in his name and that way you'll give it to me no it meant what my son would want line up your desires with his you're as if it's him for things that's what in name means if you ever listen to me i never answer my and my prayers in name because in my mind it's time to get rid of that bad thinking that's not what that means it really is in line with what would want but some people say if you claim it in name and claim his name that'll give you power with that is an abuse of that whole verse second thing they say matthew 21 if you believe you will receive whatever you ask they say just have now what they would say i got a guy that did this he went to a friend and he says i have is going to give me a quarter of a million dollars i am going to and trust 's going to give me a quarter million dollars and has him as a scribe and i knew he claimed all his money and the first thing you should do is write got a give a quarter of a million and then you should give a quarter of a million dollars whatever it is that you want to extend your if wants to in name and i'm not saying i'm going to do this that's pretty difficult it's better to do it in your own way let's focus on that this is the first thing if you do this properly because as far as being pious as to what the mind thinks about in this page i'll give you a lot of information but i also what you've promised it is not saying i want this i'm going to trust you as a way of manipulating you it's another abuse of a term but what i want you to see is they're all based on is a remote disinterested deity who's often angry who doesn't really care about your needs is the way to manipulate him do you realize how opposite that is of 's true character let me take you to then what is about if you want to think of change it out of a religious language and just say this is communication between two friends when i go home and talk with my wife you could go say i go home and with my wife and with my wife and with my wife and with my wife and with my wife and with my wife and with my wife and with my wife and with my wife. We just communicate, ? Now take that further. When I go home and talk with my wife or I , I don't go and say, here's my shopping list. Would you please do this? Will you please do this? I know you really don't me, but would you mind giving me a hug today? I don't go that. And I don't go and say, my dear great wife, I get on my knees and please bless me today. I go and share my heart. It is heart communication. It is heart openness. I can go for weeks without asking for anything. I spend time telling her how I'm doing. I ask not for something I want, but I ask how she's doing. It is a way of connecting hearts and deepening intimacy and getting to know each other better. That is what is designed to be. Now let me take that further. In a relationship that's healthy, most of our communication is spontaneous. I'll go home tonight and I'll just say, how are you feeling? And we'll connect. But it's not just spontaneous times of talking. We also have a set time each week that we set aside just to make sure we talk at a deep level. doesn't just have to be, I'm going to do this at six o'clock in the morning. I'm going to do this at six o'clock in the morning. I'm going to do this at six o'clock in the morning. I'm going to do this at six o'clock in the morning. I'm going to do this at six o'clock in the morning. I'm going to do this at six o'clock in the morning. I'm going to do this at six o'clock in the morning. I'm going to do this at six o'clock every morning for 15 minutes. Then I've done my . Do you realize that often I wake up and I realize I was as I came into consciousness? And I subconsciously throughout the day. Sometimes it comes to my conscious mind. And then I have set times where I talk to . But most of the is just spontaneous, instantaneous as things are going on in my day. It is communication. Now let me take that a step further because there's a very key thing. When you look at the 's , is actually not focusing on these words. He is saying with these attitudes. Nowhere in the does tell you when to , how long to , whether you should be on your knees, whether you should fold your hands. He doesn't go into any externals about . He only tells you the attitudes you should have. If you have the attitude, the externals will take care of themselves. And you might have times where you just fall on your knees and that is just it's in keeping with what you're feeling in your attitudes. But you might have other times where you as you walk, as you drive and that still the attitude is . the focus of is attitudes, not externals. The danger for a lot of new people coming into churches is that churches tend to get preoccupied with external things. And you don't want to get with externals and they come in and they get told you need to at this time many times a day and go this body position and they get all wrapped up in externals and says no internal attitudes is what it's all about and that is the whole focus if i went home and i said with a closed heart to my wife here's my list how are you doing today i had a good day tell me what you're doing tomorrow we just communicated no we did not we talked but the attitude wasn't there if i go home with the attitude it doesn't matter if i'm sitting on the couch if i'm standing looking at her if i'm lying in bed if the attitude is there we will communicate and it will go beyond talking and is saying what is get the attitude and what is it's it's a longing to connect with it is a longing for an intimate relationship it's a longing to have his heart in my life it's a longing for a life that is dependent and growing in a relationship with him that's the longing and just put words to that here's a quote i came across that i love true is not first external words it is a longing to connect with it is a heart attitude the external words have meaning only if they express the heart attitude the concern of is not that you say the words but that you long for the things it's your heart condition that's his concern now one of the things that i often do with addicts when they start talking about this is i say how many of you have had times in your life where there's been a groan in your heart that is deep you can't find words for it's just a groan and they all put up their hands because you've had that pain that depression and i say that at times in my life is how i i'll go home and i say to kim it was a groan day and she knows what i mean she knows that there was a pain and a longing deep i couldn't find words for just a groan came out and here's what i have confidence in romans 8 says he hears our groans and he puts words to them for us he interprets groans and knows what we're actually for sometimes i without saying words at all or even groaning i listen to music and i just feel my heart starting to warm and adore and open up to that's that's communicating all of those become good one of the reasons i love the psalms and we've been going through some of the psalms is the psalms was a songbook we talked about that but it was also a poetic journal but it was also a journal and what you find in the prayers of the psalms is raw honesty real authenticity real emotions and i said last week when we talked about being angry at wants us to be real and authentic he wants us to process that but that's what is expressing i am struggling today i'm having a bad day i am really upset today with you because i'm not sure what you're doing i am really feeling a lot of anxiety and i don't know what to do with it you're just talking it out i got asked this week this question i'll end with this they said tim you're a very reserved person you don't express visibly a lot of emotions you're pretty level guy what do you do when you feel strong emotions i said first you need to understand i feel strong emotions but in a leadership role you got to have a lot of filters to before you can express some of that they said what do you do with those strong emotions if you can't express them i go that's one of the key parts of my relationship with i can take whatever powerful emotion i have and the first place i go is up and i talk to him about it i express it and that helps me regulate and process a lot of those deep painful emotions i hope that helps you on don't get hung up on doing it a certain way or getting it just get hung up on i want to get to know this and have a relationship and let come out what comes out i gotta add one more thing if to time you're wanting to wear this il kwik as the time of time in this message prior to coming out of the one of the other things that i'm getting criticized for but most of you appreciate is that i strongly believe the and they would drop an F-bomb here and they're just letting it out and all the Christians are going oh they can't talk that I says 's good with that they're just being real in their life they're just talking with the best adjectives they know and loves that