Welcome to another Friday night. We're looking at life traps or patterns of survival that children developed in early childhood because of the danger of their neglect or abuse, and they allowed them to survive. But now what they have found in adult life is that those very survival skills and tools and the patterns that developed in their thinking and emotions and behavior are now really messing up their adult relationships and their adult life. And they go to change them or they want to change them, but there's something in them that keeps drawing them back to repeat them, and they find that they're prisons. And tonight I want to look at two that I'm going to really combine, and it's approval-seeking and attention-seeking. And they're not identical, but they overlap, and there's similar core issues, and that's why I want to put them together. approval. Approval-seeking is I need you to me. I need you to approve of me. I need you to admire me, to respect me. Attention-seeking is I just need you to see me. Now hopefully when you see me, you're going to approve of me and respect me and admire me, but that's not the top priority. I'm just desperate to be seen. let me give you an example. Take a girl, a very beautiful girl, but she grows up in complex trauma and has never felt totally seen or totally loved. But what she has learned early on in life is that she gets a lot of positive attention from men when she flirts or when she wears something provocative, and she loves that attention. She doesn't get it at home, and it just feels good. And it gives her a feeling of being desirable. It gives her a feeling, a feeling of power, that she can wrap these people around her finger now. It's a wonderful feeling for her. But over time, she begins to realize that all of the attention she gets is people aren't really seeing her. They're just seeing her sexuality, and all the attention is physical, sexual. And she begins to resent that. She begins to feel used. And she, realizes, wow, they still don't see me. They only see a fantasy of me. And she decides, I'm going to quit this. I'm going to quit being provocative. I'm going to quit flirting. I don't want this kind of attention. But she also sees that she's been manipulating men to try to get them to give her attention, and she's really, really upset with herself about how she's manipulated people all her life. And , she decides to quit. And she's proud of her decision. And she goes for a week without flirting or doing anything provocative. But the problem is, nobody gives her attention. Nobody fawns over her. Nobody gives her that look. And all of a sudden, all of the old feelings of being unseen and unloved and not worth anything and not being desirable, all come flooding down. And she doesn't want to give in to flirting because she knows that leads to sexual, physical desires in others. And she decides, I'm going to just sit in this feeling of being unloved and unseen and not desirable, this loneliness. I'm just going to sit in it. And maybe over time, people will begin to see me for who I am. she sits in it for a week. And she still doesn't get any attention. I'm going to quit. After a while, she goes, I can't live this. This is too much. I need to be desired. I need attention. I love that feeling. And she goes back to flirting and doing provocative things. And she hates it, but she can't stop doing it. She wants to quit doing it, but she has to do it. It's become a prison for her. that's what we're talking about here. Now, when we talk about this attention seeking and this approval seeking, there's really kind of two types. There's the very overt in your face. They don't hide the fact that they're trying to get attention, be the center of attention, be noticed, be approved of, looking for compliments. And then there's the very covert where they drop hints. They fish for compliments without really coming out and saying them. They're fishing for compliments. They put themselves down, but really it's that you'll build them up and say, oh no, you're wonderful. They give you gifts. They do little things for you, hoping that you will approve of them and give them compliments. it's very much covert. some people go to that very overt. Others are very covert. Then what you will notice is it can work itself out in different ways. And some can have a variety of these ways. Some can only kind of major on one of these ways. But some, their attention seeking and approval seeking is very much in the verbal realm. They're bragging. They're telling stories, sensational stories. They're gossiping in order to get noticed and get approval. it's always kind of with their words. Others, they rely more on their actions. they serve others. They accomplish things and look for rewards and they look for recognition because of that. Others rely on their position. if they get in a position that's prominent, a position that's prestigious, then they're going to get notice. They're going to get approval. it's very much seeking position for them. Others, it's very much they're looking for something. Others, it's very much in social settings. They just impulsively do things to grab the limelight, to get notice, to get approval. it's very much within social settings, certain behaviors. And then others, they don't even try to do things to get kind of direct attention on themselves. They just try to become friends with somebody who gets lots of attention and approval and then just kind of be in their shadow. And hope that, the moon, the glory of the sun will shine on them and people will notice them because they're connected to this superstar. those are different avenues that people have for gaining attention and approval. what's important to understand is the common factor in both of these life traps is that one's identity, sense of self-esteem, is dependent primarily on the reactions of others, not on one's own sense of inherent value. I need others to approve of me in order to feel good about myself. I don't have that feeling good about myself inherently within me. And all of behaviors are trying to get others to keep feeding my need to feel good about myself. And the person doesn't develop a secure sense of self. They continue to depend on others to provide the feelings of self. it often then includes this overemphasis on status, appearance, social acceptance, money, achievement, any kind of thing that will gain them approval, gain them attention. somebody has said this, these children tend to do in school and be behaved because they're seeking approval. They also tend to be accepted into social groups easily as they are either helpful and accommodating or impressive and high achieving. As such, and this is the key point, having the approval seeking, recognition seeking schema or life trap as a child often goes unnoticed. It often is seen as a positive quality. It is often seen as a good thing. Instead, it is usually within late adult lessons and adulthood that the individual will start feeling the strain of continually acting in a way to gain approval or recognition instead of behaving authentically. In other words, people don't see this life trap as a problem until later on and then they start to realize there's just a constant stress and anxiety that they're feeling and that they never feel they can be their authentic selves. One of the things that happens with this is that people begin also to realize that all of the major decisions in their life start to feel somewhat unsatisfying because it hasn't been a decision based on what you're doing, what they want, who they are. It's always been, I wonder what others will approve of. I wonder what others will . it's almost others are making the major decisions of your life for you and you're not making them based on who you really are. And you begin to really get tired of that and notice I'm feeling very unfulfilled, deep down. But then more than that, everything is dependent on I need others to approve of me constantly. And if I'm not getting constant approval, you begin to feel rejection, rejection, rejection. And rejection more and more begins to be something you struggle with, feelings of rejection when really it's because you didn't get the approval you were wanting that day. And you seek more and more for approval, but then what you find is people get onto you and they get tired of you constantly seeking attention or approval. And now the actual opposite begins to happen. People don't give you attention or approval because that's all you want. And they start sending boundaries with you. And all of a sudden, people are getting tired of you. And the very thing you're craving, you're getting less and less because people refuse to get it. Somebody has said this, you may experience an excessive compulsion or need to receive approval from others that can influence your decisions on what you pursue and how you interact with people. Importantly, when this approval is given, it can make your day seem fantastic. You just are top of the world. Whereas if it is slightly withdrawn, people don't give you much approval that day, things can come crashing down around you emotionally. you're now on an emotional roller coaster based on whether people are giving you lots of approval or not. This can leave our sense of self-esteem on very wobbly legs and highly dependent on the opinions and agendas of other people. When activated, this life's trap may understandably trigger our moods to swing depending on what others say about us or try to build high achievement in areas that are important to us in an attempt to gain approval. As a result, we may experience frustrations and anxiety or a sense of being inauthentic to our true selves. We may also become highly sensitive to any form of criticism or rejection. It can result in confused identities or feelings of emptiness. This schema is particularly problematic as approval is dependent from many factors beyond our control. Yet it dictates how we feel about our self. The true need behind this schema is to feel confident in our core sense of self and worthy or lovable as who we are, independent from the opinion of others. And we'll get to that. let's go to our test. answer one, if it's completely untrue of you. Two, if it's mostly untrue of you. Three, if it's slightly more true than untrue. Four, if it's moderately true. Five, if it's mostly true. And six, if it describes you perfectly. And if you have a five or six answer to any of the questions, then this could be a life trap that is significant for you. question one, I worry a lot about what people think of me. Two, many of my decisions have been based on what other people will think. Three, in social situations I get anxious that people are judging me or don't me. Four, I tend to change how I act and talk depending on who I am with. Five, I don't feel I have a strong sense of identity. Six, lots of praise and attention from others makes me feel worthwhile. Seven, I want everyone to me. Eight, having money and status is really important to me. Nine, my self-esteem is very high and I am very dependent on what other people think of me. Ten, I tend to dwell on what I have said or done worrying that I might have offended someone. scoring 10 to 19, this life trap probably doesn't apply to you. 20 to 29, it might apply to you occasionally. 30 to 39, probably is an issue for you. 40 to 49, probably an important life trap in your life. And 50 to 60, definitely probably one of your core life traps. Now I want to take those 10 questions and do a deeper dive into the characteristics of a person with attention seeking or approval seeking as a life trap. you find yourself frequently recounting positive stories about yourself to show your positive qualities to the people around you. whenever you talk to somebody, you go, hi, how are you? But it's not that you're really interested in them and how they are doing. It's they'll ask you how you're doing you can start talking about yourself. Or you brag constantly, maybe subtle, non-subtle ways about your material wealth, your physical appearance, your personal successes. Or you push the envelope in social settings. You push people's buttons to get a rise out of them. That way they notice you. You get attention. Or you're always pulling practical jokes on people. You're purposely controversial in conversations to provoke a reaction. You post excessively on social media, seeming to vie for as many and comments as possible. You make comments online or in person that seem calculated to make people feel uncomfortable or cross social boundaries. Or you're always needing to give advice to people. Or you engage in provocative, promiscuous, or exhibitionist behavior. You make frequent self-deprecating comments in an effort to get validated, in an effort to get people to say, oh, no, no, that's not true of you. No, you're really wonderful. You seem to act as though everything that happens to you is a catastrophe, even when it's not. you create drama in order to get noticed. You seem to always want to be the center of attention. in every situation, it's just you're trying to draw the spotlight to, hey, I'm over here. Everybody notice me. You're super competitive. You always have to be the best at everything. You tend to see other people with similar strengths as you as the competition or as threats to your prestige. And they're not people that you would see as someone to have a relationship with. No, they're the enemy. You have what might be described as a dramatic personality, that you're overly emotional beyond kind of what is appropriate for the situation. You find it hard to make decisions, big or small, without. getting everybody else's opinions and get them to weigh in on it. You seek excessive reassurance from others that you've done or are doing the thing. You feel unconfident about decisions you've made or are making. You reject opportunities and experiences you want because you worry whether others will approve of it. You feel ashamed if someone questions or dislikes something you do or say. You fish for compliments by pointing out achievements and seeking validation. You exaggerate or embellish stories in order to gain praise or sympathy. You pretend to be unable to do something almost a learned helplessness in order to get others to rush in and teach you or do it for you. You ruminate over social interactions and experience feelings of self-doubt about decisions you made, which results in lots of anxiety. this lack of praise or recognition, if you experience lack of praise or recognition, causes you all of a sudden to not feel very worthwhile as a person. You just feel shame. Or you get anxiety if you're not getting the response. You're not getting the recognition that you thought you would be getting in a certain situation. Or you feel less important if you didn't receive attention at work or recognition at work or in a social setting that you thought you would get. All of a sudden, you can't look people in the eye. You just don't feel as important. You experience rapid changes in your emotions from very positive to very negative, dependent on what people are saying about you. The goals you choose for your life are actually based on what others think you should do, not on what you really want. You change your behaviors depending on who you are with. You pay particular attention to what it takes to fit in with the group you are with. You struggle with jealousy issues. You have a deep fear that you will remain unloved and unseen if you don't do these behaviors. You are driven, a workaholic. You're never able to relax because you're always needing to do something to get approval or recognition. many with this life trap have unrelenting standards. if I'm going to get recognition, if I'm going to get approval, then I have to be the best. I've got to meet this standard. And those standards are often unrealistic. those are the characteristics. I don't know how you see yourself after going through that. You might for the first time begin to realize, I've got some issues here. where do they come from? What is this about? instead of beating yourself up and saying, oh, I've got to stop this approval seeking or attention seeking, why do I do that? Where does this come from? kind of three big things that come out of complex trauma. number one, it's parents that weren't attuned to the child's emotional needs. And your emotional needs were not seen and therefore met. secondly, that's another way of saying you experience something, some type of neglect. You did not receive the attention you should have from your parents. And it could be they were workaholics. It could be they were narcissists. It could be they were very insecure driven. Or it could be, not that they did it intentionally, but you were in a very large family. Or they had their own family business and it demanded all of their time. Or they had chronic health problems or mental health problems. And they just weren't able to be there for you. Another part of this is every child needs validation. That's one of our emotional needs. They need to be told, you're good at that. Hey, you are this way. You did a great job there. That's how a child learns who they are. That's how a child begins to get a good positive self-identity. But some parents grew up in an era where they were told that if you validated your children they would get a big head. They would become proud. They would get a big ego. And parents purposely didn't validate their children wanting to keep them humble. But it had the reverse effect. It created shame. based on inaccurate teaching, parents often did not validate their children sufficiently. what happens for a child whose need for validation is not met in a consistent way is they can go in one of two directions. they can suppress the need for validation. basically that means suppress all of my needs. Because if I express my needs and I should get validation but rather I get rejection, I get punishment, in other words I get pain, therefore let's become invisible. Let's not need validation. Let's not have needs. Let's make no demands. children this often become invisible children. They develop a rich fantasy world. They become a loner. They become self-sufficient. That's what they need to do to not go through the pain of not being validated. Now the challenge, if I can give as an aside, for many invisible children when they come into recovery is that when they begin to realize I need to make myself visible. I need to put my needs out there. I need to express my desires. I need to try things and do things. All of a sudden they feel guilty. All of a sudden fear kicks in. I'm going to get rejected. I'm going to get judged. I'm going to get punished. And for them to come out of invisibility into healthy expression of needs creates tremendous fear. It is a very difficult thing and they often feel guilty doing that. just be aware of that. But the second thing that can happen when a child is not validated is that they then go to developing a hyper need for validation, a hyper need for approval, a hyper need for recognition. It becomes this black hole that can never be satisfied an itch that just can't be scratched sufficiently. with attention seeking, this is important to understand. A child that is neglected, they will do things to gain attention. They will make attention seeking behaviors. It's not to be bad. It's because they want to connect. It's a bid for connection. It's please notice me that you will connect with me. it's driven by this huge need for connection that every child has. But if the parents don't connect and then judge the child for the attention seeking behavior, the child begins to go, I'm bad. Nobody wants me because I'm not good enough. shame develops. This deep self identity that sees itself as negative, that sees itself as bad, unlovable, not good enough. And then what comes out of that is, but I still want to be seen. I still want to be noticed. I don't care if it's in a good way anymore. I just want to be seen. Hopefully people will connect. But if they don't, oh , I just need to be seen. now attention seeking behavior can go into very many maladaptive forms. Just wanting to be noticed. And for some kids it can develop into almost rebellion. I am going to go to maladaptive attention seeking things because I know my parents get mad at me for that. And that's going to pay them off. And that's going to pay them back for not giving me healthy attention. the attention seeking is a hyper need because of lack of validation, healthy validation. The approval seeking, if you look at the shame that has developed, that I must not be good enough. And the child then doesn't have any positive feelings towards himself. But they want to be loved. They want to be approved. They want to feel good. they can't give that to themselves. they go looking to please others. To gain others approval as a solution to their shame. that is where this comes from. Now let me just show you some of the other things that parents can do that create this attention approval seeking life trap. many parents will place kind of in a shame type of culture. They place tons of importance on what other people think of them. they're always concerned with outward appearances or keeping up appearances. you got to act a certain way, dress a certain way, talk a certain way, have certain manners, do certain things in public in order to gain the approval of others. It's all about being approved by others. a child growing up, when they want to dress the way that suits them, that is comfortable to them, when they want to engage in certain hobbies or sports or activities, the parents are going, but is that going to be approved by the culture, the people I know in my culture? If not, no, you can't wear that. No, you can't have that activity. the child's life is not guided by their abilities, their drives, their desires. It's guided by their desires. It's guided by keeping up appearances, getting the approval of the culture. And that then is a parent who can have this life trap themself. That their life is all based on gaining approval, their life is all about image. It's all about status. It's all about success. It's all about material possessions. It's all about money. It's all about externals. That is the guiding factor in their parent's life. And the child then is brought into that world and tried to get squeezed into that mold. Another thing that can happen is that children grow up where parents only validate them when they do what the parents want, when they please the parents. And if their parents are narcissists, if their parents are all about image and externals, they're going to get validation for being pretty. They're going to get validation for being the smartest kid in the class, the best athlete. They're not going to get validated for what really matters in life. They're only going to get validated for what fits the parent's value system, what the parents deem as the marks of success. Other children, if they grew up with abuse, if they grew up with bullying, if they grew up with abandonment, if they grew up with a child who was a victim of abuse, if they grew up with abuse, they're going to get shame through those avenues. And then what happens with shame? I need others to approve me. I need others to see me. And mainly neglect can bring it, but abuse and abandonment can also bring this about because it produces the same shame issue. Another thing that can happen for many children is they might have got the predominant thing they got from their parents was criticism, judgment. They were always finding fault with everything they did. Nothing they did was ever good enough. And the child was just driven to try to get approval, to be desperate for approval. Another one is if you had a parent who was a narcissist. They were living this life trap out in their own life. And that was your role model. That was your normal. And that's what you grew up with and you developed. Another common thing that happens within complex trauma is children begin to realize they're kind of viewed as a perfect doll. And they're pretty, they're behaved, they're pleasing. They're kind of a pretty doll on a shelf that everybody just admires. Everybody just sees them a certain way. They see them based on their physical, their physical behaviors and their physical appearance. Nobody actually sees the real them for who they really are. They only see the externals and then assume that this is who they are. But it's actually, they see them through a fantasy lens of who they want them to be. And many children kind of get put in that perfect doll role. You got to look a certain way, act a certain way, and be this way because then we will admire you. Then we will. And they act they see you all the time because they give you much attention, but they don't really see you. They see you through a fantasy lens, who they want you to be. Some children are given by their parents roles. in complex trauma, we talk about children developing roles to try to not get hurt, to try to get their needs met, to try to fix the family. But sometimes in complex trauma, children are assigned roles without even being told they're assigned roles. They just gradually pick up that they're expected to live a certain way. some are expected to be the hero, but some children are assigned the role or expected to be invisible. That you're going to be the child that never makes demands. You're going to be the child that's going to be the flower on the wall. That's just there, pretty, no demands, invisible. And many children have grown up feeling that subtle constant expectation that they're never to draw attention to themselves, never to express needs, never to make demands, never be a burden. That's just what was passed on to them. Others, they had a sibling who was put into the hero role. Or the comedian role. And they got tons of validation from everybody for being such a wonderful child, for being funny. But you weren't assigned the comedian role or the hero role. you didn't get any validation. Some children, they learned that the only way they would get noticed was not by being good, by not doing positive things. Their parents wouldn't give them validation for that. the only way they would get noticed is by being bad, by creating a crisis, by doing stuff the parents didn't want them to do. Then all of a sudden they got the attention they were seeking, the attention they would not get by being good. Some children were only validated for one thing. Their brains, their looks, their body, their being funny, their being good at sports. And when they realized, I don't get any validation in life except for my athletic ability, my brains, my looks. They then made this commitment. I am going to be a pro. I am going to be the best at this. I am going to put all my attention into developing this ability. Because in their mind, that's the only place their value came from. And they were going to get it to have maximum value. And that became their obsession. what I want you to see is that all of these things, can you see the shame component? All of the stuff that came out of neglect, not being validated, produced shame. Now all the other things that the parents did produced shame. shame is the underlying element here. And approval seeking, attention seeking, is all driven by shame. It's all trying to solve shame. But it doesn't work. shame is this underlying issue. instead of it working to solve shame, instead of it working to get positive validation, to get positive admiration, it begins to have the opposite effect. we talked about, you begin to not know who you are. Because you're trying to please everybody else and be what they want. you lose your sense of identity. You don't even know what your needs are, what your thoughts are, your feelings are after a while. Then you're not able to truly connect with people because true connection requires authenticity. And you don't know what that is. And you begin to realize that your relationships are all rather superficial. Then people start to think, they start getting tired of you always wanting approval or seeking attention. And they stop giving it to you. They set boundaries. They end the relationship because you're wearing them out. Sometimes people begin to realize they're doing things for attention or approval that actually goes against their own deep values and beliefs. now they're being hypocrites. Now they're doing stuff that's causing them to feel guilty. And it creates deeper and deeper insecurity. Because all of my good feelings are dependent on others now. And I'm always worried about, are they going to approve today? What do they think about this? What about that? Deeper and deeper insecurity, which causes deeper and deeper stress in everyday life. Deeper and deeper anxiety. And many people get overwhelmed by the anxiety, insecurity, stress of all of this, that they go to fight, flight, freeze. Many end up in unhealthy behaviors, unhealthy medicating, numbing the behaviors through drugs, misuse of food, sex, etc. you come into recovery. Now what do you do? What do you need to be aware of? Dangers. Be aware that it's easy when you get into recovery and now you're with a new group of people who are also in recovery. It's really easy to stop. Just slide back into wanting them to see you and notice you and approve of you but using the old tools. Fear of being authentic. Fear that if they see you, they're going to judge you. And let's go back to old behaviors. be very aware of that. Some people go, I was an attention seeker, approval seeker, I need to go to the other extreme, the pendulum swing. now I'm not going to do anything to put myself out there. Now I'm not going to serve others. Now I'm not going to be nice to others. Now I'm not going to do things for others because, oh, that might be attention seeking. That might be approval seeking. The issue is not the behavior. The issue is the motive behind the behavior. Why am I doing the behavior? Am I doing it because I want to be of service and love people or am I doing it that others will love me? That becomes the issue. It's not much the behavior. Don't get focused on changing the behavior. Focus on changing the behavior. Focus on changing the motive behind the behavior. But be aware of this. You're never going to have 100 pure motive. When you do a nice thing for others, you might be 80 just wanting to be loving but there's maybe still a small percentage of you that's hoping that they're going to approve of you. Don't get hung up on, I need to not do something until 100 pure motive. You're probably never going to have 100 pure motive. Just keep working on growing that your motive becomes more and more pure as time goes on. Also, be aware that if you have still lots of shame which has shown itself and you're just shy, not wanting to put yourself out there, that you're probably going to be attracted to attention seekers. You're going to be attracted to attention seekers because attention seekers are not just people who are going to be attracted to you. Because attention seekers to talk a lot. They to dominate conversations. And for a shy person who goes, I can just relax and hide here in the shadows and let them do all the talking. But what happens is you're setting up relationship dynamics that are unhealthy. You're setting up friendships that are starting off unhealthy with old unhealthy tools. just be aware that you don't fall into those old patterns. what do we have to do to heal? I again say begin by understanding where did your attention seeking, approval seeking life trap come from? What were the things in your childhood that caused you to develop this hyper need for approval or for attention? List them. Begin to understand that. Then list the ways that you look for approval today. Of those characteristics we listed, which were the ones that are true of you? When are they triggered? When do you do them the most? Start really understanding what this life trap looks specifically, uniquely for you in your life. Then look underneath that as to, what is triggering this? there's the shame issues. But it could be when I'm in certain situations, new people, social settings, whatever it is. Begin to explore what are the underlying things that trigger me to all of a sudden want to act in ways to gain approval or attention. And then bottom line, I hope you again see that you got to heal the shame. If you don't heal the shame, this life trap never goes away. You can modify it in different ways. But it's still going to keep showing up. heal the shame. And part of healing the shame is coming to accept yourself for who you are. I don't need other people's validation to be with me. I accept me. I'm . And then you learn to validate yourself. You learn to say, yes, this is my desire. This is my personality. I'm with it. This is my talents. I my talents. I'm good at this. You learn to validate yourself. I don't need everybody to be my sources of validation. Though I'm still going to have some healthy people validate me. I'm going to learn to meet this need for myself. I'm going to parent myself and learn to validate myself. That's not pride. That's not having a big ego. No, that's humility. See yourself. See yourself. See yourself. Humility. Seeing myself accurately. Meeting this need of validation in a healthy way for myself is significant. realize with that what you're doing is retraining your validation need. Because you were made to feel that lack of validation is humility. Lack of validation is virtue. Lack of validation is healthy. But it's not. It leads to shame. How can that be healthy? But to retrain that to healthy validation it's going to make you feel guilty. It's going to make you feel that you're being proud. But you have to learn to get through that transition until the healthy begins to feel normal. And you don't feel guilty for it. learn to do that. Don't go from excessive validation, pendulum swing, swing tide, I shouldn't need any validation. No. Everybody needs validation. You just have to figure out what that looks for you. Retrain yourself as to when do I slide into unhealthy validation. What is healthy validation? Begin to understand that. And that's going to take some time but it is important. Then if you're in a social setting with other people and all of a sudden you feel the impulse to do something to get attention, to get approval, stop yourself. Don't give in to it. Don't feed it. But then explore. , what's going on here? What's caused me to all of a sudden want to do those old behaviors? That can be a really important learning thing. And then I think it's important to have a healthy surrogate, mentor, parent in your life who can give you healthy validation, let when you're giving yourself healthy validation, when it's unhealthy, when you're sliding into old behaviors of seeking unhealthy attention, seeking unhealthy approval. That can just be that parent for you to help you sort through healthy from unhealthy validation. this is a process. It's going to take time. You're not going to get it perfectly overnight. Be patient with yourself. Don't be judging yourself or criticizing yourself if you fall into some old behaviors occasionally. Learn from them each time and keep gradually working on this. But bottom line, heal the shame. Learn to be able to give yourself that healthy validation. , that's the end of another Friday night. Hope that was helpful. I hope you enjoyed it.