When you come out of complex trauma, you develop ways of relating to survive. And those kept you safe, the ways you learned to relate. But what you find is as you get older, they don't work anymore. But it's important to go back and really understand your relationship style and why you relate the way you relate. When we talk about complex trauma, one of the terms that I use regularly is a dysfunctional family. And I have had many, many hundreds of people say to me, everybody's got a dysfunctional family, we are dysfunctional. And what goes on in their mind is this distinction that goes, the only other option to dysfunction is perfect. nobody's got a perfect family, we're all dysfunctional. And that seems to make sense, but it really misses an important piece. And that is dysfunctional, the opposite isn't perfect, the opposite is functional. But what does that mean? the word dis for dysfunctional actually means in pain. And what we mean when we say a dysfunctional family, it's a family that's in pain. And a family that can't resolve pain. let me broaden that for you. All families go through pain. All families have hard times. All families have bad things that happen. A functional family is able to deal with those things, resolve it, and come out the better for it. there are functional families. to be a functional family doesn't mean you never go through pain. You never go through hard times. All families do. What makes it a dysfunctional family is it can't resolve that pain. And the members of the family live in unresolved pain, which leads to the piling up of pain. And that is the reality of a dysfunctional family. And what we're going to see as we go into this, is that dysfunctional families are not the same. They're not the same people. They're not the same people. to put it in other words, the child's pain is the same as the one that's going through pain. And a dysfunctional family is the one that's going through pain, not the one that's going through pain. But the problem is that children growing up in pain, they begin to go in their mind, what do I need to do? And they have three different priorities in their mind. needs met in this family that is in a lot of pain and that's where the roles come into play in a family of complex trauma a dysfunctional family there's the one child that's referred to as the troublemaker they're the ones that's defiant rebellious angry all the time and he just won't get with the program and smarten up now let me say this up front of all the roles that we're going to look at the problem child is the one person in the family that is being honest everybody else is lying both to each other and to the other and that's the one child that's referred to as the troublemaker and to themselves what is going on in the scapegoat or the problem child is they're saying this family is sick and I'm not gonna lie about that we're messed up and everybody walks around we love each other and all our needs are being met they're not and I'm not gonna go along with it I'm rebelling now what I want you to get is this they're willing to do everything they can to get rid of the problem child and their rebellion is actually a healthy thing because they're saying I don't want a house of lies where we abuse and hurt each other I refuse to go along with that I rebel against what's happening here now that's how it starts a good rebellion the problem is it goes into a bad rebellion and it's a bad rebellion and it's a bad rebellion and it's a bad one too but if now we have walking around with the broken heart that we know clearly that the rules are the rules you pay no price on it and now this tries to do the misane towerssamaides what give a man a face of power not a role that now when you save your future it's the America Black Lives Matter is one of the biggest ones that llegó an étoile called the scapegoat he is blamed for all the problems in the family in the marriage and what the parents basically communicate is this if we didn't have this child we wouldn't have any problems in our family it all gets pinned on that child they're actually quite happy to have this child because they got somebody to blame for their stuff and they don't want to look at their stuff they have a scapegoat to put it on that then results in this problem child getting blamed for everything and more stuff gets piled on them all the time now a couple of the things are happening with the scapegoat the scapegoat is a problem child and it's a problem child and it's a problem child and it's a problem child and it's a problem child becomes the honest expression of how everybody's really feeling but afraid to show when he rebels and he gets angry and he lashes out and he speaks his mind to mom and dad he's really giving a voice to everybody they won't admit it but that they're almost thankful for but then what happens with this scapegoat is they're really ostracized by the family the family says you're the problem and they kind of feel a black sheep they don't fit they don't belong in this family because they refuse to play by the rules of this family and they feel an outsider and outcast that's as a child now let me show you what happens when the Naru time or text really in that adult life but now I said goodbye인데 mother as they gave you explain you I install yet with in checking one as they can extend the order into adult life a他的 help lady they had to rebel. And in order to rebel, they had to harden their heart and harden their skin and shut down their sensitivity. And what begins to happen in a problem child as they get into their teens is they try not to feel anything at all. And they shut everything down. Now that will become problems for them later in life. They will have to relearn how to feel emotions. They will have to really enter into scary territory. that's the first problem. The next one, part of their rebellion in their teens is they started getting applause from other kids for being a bad boy. And they said, wow, here's how I get. I get my validation. I can't be validated in my family because the hero gets all the validation. I will get validation from being a bad boy. And they tried to be the baddest of the bad. And what often happened is they felt in order to get new validation, they had to keep pushing the envelope. last time they drank a whole 12-pack at a party. This time, they're drinking a 2-4 at a party. And everybody's going to talk about how drunk they got. And then they push and push always a new way of rebelling against the system. And that can be a problem. And then as soon as somebody says, who's in authority, I want you to do this, they've trained themselves to do the opposite. And then they've trained themselves to do the opposite. And in a relationship, if their partner said, could you do this for me? They just get their back up. And they don't want to do that for them. And to have a relationship, they're going to have to look at that rebellious knee-jerk reaction that is part of how they train themselves to respond to authority and to rules. And then they're going to have to look at that rebellious knee-jerk reaction that is part of how they train themselves to respond to authority and to rules. And then much of what they learn to do in their rebellion is to manipulate people, to intimidate people. they got what they want, but people don't see them as safe. People see them as a bit of a danger, a loose cannon, as a person who couldn't be trusted, a person that's just got too many anger issues. And they, they struggle with all of that. And the problem child, it started out really good. They refused to accept a sick situation. But what happened is they, in order to maintain that role, had to get sicker and sicker themselves. They don't realize how sick they had to become. And now, when they come into adult life, they're going to still find people who pat them on the back for being a bad boy and pushing the envelope. But if they're going to get healthy and have healthy relationships, they got to be able to let that bad boy go. Now here's a challenge that many have. They go, if I let go of the bad boy, then, who am I? I don't want to become a weak, little, mushy, sensitive person again, that's going to get walked all over and hurt. And to give up a role, either the hero or the problem child, the scapegoat, there's a fear, a fear that if I drop this role, will I get hurt again? Will I get my needs met again? What will happen? And for the scapegoat, the hero, yes, there's fear, but you're never going to get healthy unless you walk through it. And that's what we're about, is helping people walk through that and begin to change that they can have meaningful relationships today. Let me say one final thing about the problem child, the bad boy. I find that, let's say you were a bad girl, ? Isn't it interesting how bad girls are attracted to bad boys? And guess what happens in recovery? Bad girls, they're prepared to give up being a bad girl, but for some reason, they're still attracted to bad boys. That's a recipe for disaster. if that is your pattern, you're going to have to look at that piece as .