we've been looking at the 60 characteristics of complex trauma. Today we're coming to one that might seem very innocent, it's no big deal. But it's a big deal for people from complex trauma. And it's the tendency to be negative and critical. what I want to say up front is being negative and critical is both an attitude and an action. It's a mindset that people from complex trauma develop where they choose, often without realizing that they're choosing it, but they're choosing to find fault with stuff. They're choosing to look for negative. And I want to start with just kind of giving you a definition, a better understanding of what I am talking about. Here's the definition. It's a common but very dangerous headspace for those with C, PTSD, or complex trauma. They are marked by an overall discontent and find fault with just about everything. let me give you some examples of how this would work out in people's life. somebody with kind of a negative orientation, a negative critical headspace, is somebody that tends to complain a lot. And they might do it in joking ways, sarcastic ways, but complaining is a common thing. Or they blame others a lot for their problems, for their discontent. When they meet people, they look for a flaw. And they are very commonly known for criticizing people, pointing out their flaws. Many will have a victim mentality. it's, oh, my life is awful, poor me, and just dwell on all of the negatives in their life. Others, when they're in a situation that's new or different, or they feel uncomfortable, they jump to the worst case scenario. And they go to, this is all terrible, and it's a very negative thing. Others dwell on bad news. All the time they just focus on all the bad news in the media, social media, and the internet. And they're not even aware of the bad news. And they're not even aware of the bad news in the media, social media, from reports from friends, etc. Think of a person who's in a hurry, ? And nobody is cooperating. you are driving somewhere, and you're in a hurry to get there, but nobody is making that easy for you. what do you do as you're driving? Everybody else on the road is an idiot. Everybody else is stupid. And you just criticize everything. You criticize the city because the traffic lights aren't talking. You criticize the city because the traffic lights aren't talking. You criticize the city because the traffic lights aren't talking. You criticize the city because the traffic lights aren't talking. And you're aujourdiped after time Crime properly. And then some times if you picture yourself wear you're tired, exhausted, and you just want a bigger bubble tonight, you don't want people coming into your bubble wanting to connect, what happens when your spouse wants to connect, your children wanna spend time with you? You tend to find fault with them. You think they are just selfish. They are not considerate of my needs. And you become towels吽 very negative before we look at the complex trauma connection to this why people from complex trauma have this negative orientation let me first make a distinction between healthy negative and unhealthy negative healthy critical and unhealthy critical healthy critical is what we would call discernment and discernment is what we train our children to do don't trust people just because they're nice see past the niceness to the truth about the person pay attention to red flags pay attention to your gut and what we are wanting people to do is we wanna unear that guy and let him talk about an issue as we do is see the other person accurately to know whether they're safe or unsafe healthy or unhealthy and discernment is not being fooled by the external it's seeing past that to an accurate picture of the person unhealthy critical is finding faults with others not for healthy reasons but for very unhealthy reasons this is not just about being critical this is why I'm critical it can be for a good purpose to stay safe or it can have very unhealthy purposes I want to give you 22 reasons why people from complex trauma often become negative and critical what I want you to see is it's just not one or two things this being negative and critical meets many needs with people who are in danger and it becomes part of their life in many different ways and to understand that is really important in beginning to identify the reasons why you are often negative and critical and again I want to point out that for many people from complex trauma this is a default setting this is where they go to subconsciously don't even realize they're doing it happens in their subconscious mind and periodically comes to their conscious mind the first thing to understand about complex trauma is that you're in constant danger you cannot resolve the dangerous situations. You can't get to a place of safety. And what the brain is doing is saying, I got to find a way to protect this child. what can I do to keep this child safe? Number one, I will look for danger in every situation I enter. now I will train that person to look for potential problems, to look for potential harm. I am not wanting that person to see the situation from an objective point of view. They need to go in and immediately look for danger. the brain is trained to look for negative. But then if they still are getting hurt all the time, the brain has to take it up a notch. And what it then does is say, I can't just look for obvious danger. I can't just look for potential harm. I can't just look for potential harm. I can't just look for potential harm. I can't just look for potential harm. I can't just look for potential danger. I have to look for potential danger and then jump to the worst case scenario. potential danger, it might be dangerous, it might not, but I am going to choose that it is dangerous. I will jump to this is bad. Even if it's an uncomfortable feeling, I will jump to a worst case scenario. it is an essential survival tool. It is an essential survival tool. I must feel a sense of humility and a sense of fear. I must accept that I you need to change or care about something. And you are not going to sincerely judge that anyone will ever change and change. And then repeat after me. What I will do is go and look at the material things. There will be certain things that I will never change, and being a concrete goal, as far as who is in my the picture can possibly input, I am車 can continue to phrase Negative, critical. If others pay you compliments, the inner critic says they don't know the real you. If they did, they wouldn't say that. And negative, negative is the voice in your head. But then the child doesn't want to feel not good enough, not valuable. the brain is looking for ways to create a sense of I have value. And one of the things that the brain does is say, let's find fault with everybody else. Because if I can put everybody else down, that'll make me feel better about myself. And now, being critical meets the need of not feeling good enough because I put everybody else down. Then, for many people to feel value, their brain goes to, if I am perfect, then people will love me and respect me. That's what will give me value. That will fix my shame. , they try to be perfect. But what happens? Nobody can be perfect. , instead of improving their shame, improving their sense of not having enough value, trying to be perfect actually reinforces it and creates a greater negative critic. Because now you focus on everything. Every time you fail to be perfect. And that becomes your obsession. And you make that a constant thing in your mind. Another purpose that this being negative fills, is the child who's neglected, abused and abandoned has many needs that aren't being met. But they have learned that if you go and ask people to meet those needs, it's likely they're not going to. They're going to reject you. Or they're going to punish you. They're going to call you selfish. , the only way to get your needs met is you can only trust yourself. , you have to manipulate. And , one of the tools for manipulating is when I meet a person, I want to find out something really bad about them that I can use as leverage against them. That I can threaten them that I will expose this area of their life unless they do what I want. And , now I am looking for flaws in people. I am looking for the dirt on people more negative. Then for people who remain in a victim mentality. Where they go to a place where they go, I don't want to choose to change. I just want people to feel sorry for me. And , what happens in that person's mind in order to reinforce this, is that they're going to be more negative. And , when they're going to reinforce this victim mentality and getting others to feel sorry for them, they have to blame everybody, everything for their problems. They never take ownership for their problems. It's always somebody else's fault. And that's another type of negative orientation. One of the things with complex trauma is a tremendous fear of failure. And , what happens for a lot of people? When they go to start something new, is this fear that they might fail rises up inside of them. And , they want to quit. They don't even want to give it a try, a fair try, because they're pretty sure they'll fail. That's what shame has told them. And , how do you get an excuse to quit? , you find something wrong with this new project, with this new endeavor. And if I can find enough wrong things about it, enough negative things, then I have an excuse to quit or to not even start. Take that a little bit further. For some, that then goes to the need to change in their life. And , what I find with people that come to react, and they begin to realize there's not an easy fix to trauma, I'm going to have to deal with some very old wounds that are going to be painful. I am going to have to use new tools that are going to be very challenging. I'm not willing to do that. , how do I get out of changing? , let's criticize React. Let's criticize all the teachers of React. Let's criticize the way they teach their content. Let's find something negative to justify me not changing. Another very subconscious thing that happens for people is if you are from complex trauma, there's a good chance your parents also have complex trauma. And you're just the next generation that's affected. if your parents have complex trauma, there's a good chance that they have a negative critical orientation. And you probably grew up with parents going to a social event, and then afterwards, just criticizing, pointing out all the flaws in different people, gossiping all the dirt about people. You grew up in an environment where your parents were always pointing out your flaws and not encouraging you and validating you in good ways. And as you grew up in that, without realizing it, you got those tapes in your head. now when you go into any situation, you just hear your parents' voices in your head, and they become your voices. they trained you as to have a negative orientation. Another thing that I find with many people I deal with is to notice what they get especially negative about. And often what they get negative and critical about when they meet somebody or watch somebody, the thing that bothers them the most about that person is usually the thing they the least in themselves. It's the part of them that made fun of, the part of them that they hated, wished that wasn't them. Now, when they see that in somebody else, it triggers an immediate negative critical response to that person. But really, they're just projecting their own issues onto that person. Another way that many people from complex trauma try to solve, their shame, is they can't have a bigger house, they can't have more money than others, they can't compete in the looks arena, they can't compete in the sports arena and be better than others in any of those arenas. what they do is they go to the moral arena, the religious arena. And now my self-righteousness, I am more righteous than you, but how do I keep my sense of being more righteous than you? I point out all the ways you're not righteous. I focus on your moral flaws. it's necessary to feed a self-righteous attitude. Another thing that happens in complex trauma is that parents can have unrealistic expectations of their children. they can say to your child, you should have known I wanted that. In other words, to the child, you should be a mind reader. Or you should not be a child in the sense of being busy, being active, making noise, playing. You should be just quiet, seen not heard. And that unrealistic expectation caused parents to constantly be criticizing the child. And now they can say, you should have known I wanted that. And now parents can do that. In their adult life today, they can have unrealistic expectations of others, their spouse, their children, their friends. And if those people don't meet those unrealistic expectations, and they can't, then they find negative criticism about those people. Another thing that some parents can do is they wanted to have their children look only to them. They wanted to be the greatest influence, have the greatest power in their child's life. they wanted to create this extra loyalty to them, to the family. And one of the things that they often did is they then had to destroy everybody else that the children would not look to anybody else for guidance, for friendship, just to talk about things. they found fault with every friend the child brought home. They found fault with every family that the child was attracted to, just to try to create that loyalty. And sadly, within many complex trauma families, they developed a solution to their shame as being racism. Because I'm white, we're better than black people. We're better than indigenous people. And they put that into their children to say we're better than them. And now you find fault with black people, with indigenous people, in order to try to feel better about yourself. Many in complex trauma had dads who were very angry. Anger was a huge issue. But what did dad do to justify his anger? He found fault with everything. it's not my fault I'm angry, it's that, all of that crap. That's the for my anger. Then I've seen something else that people do. They know in recovery that they need to develop some healthy friendships, to build a new support system with fairly safe healthy people. But that's a scary thing. Because the fear of rejection and abandonment is deeply ingrained. And what many people do when they start to get to know somebody, and they go, I this person, I should develop a friendship with them, fear kicks in. And what then does fear do is, I can't go there. That's too risky. how do I justify not developing a friendship with this person? I look for faults in that person. I look for all their flaws, to justify not developing a friendship with them. Another purpose for being negative and critical, is to justify your own flaws, and your own not changing. if somebody says, you are always inconsiderate or disrespectful, you might respond by saying, at least I'm not as bad as you. I'm not as bad as them, or them, or them. because they're worse than me, then that means I'm , I don't have to change. Sad that it happens much, but it does. Then, one of the extreme responses to extreme shame, is narcissism. Thinking I'm better than everybody, smarter, that everybody looks up to me, everybody thinks I'm better, I'm a genius. And what can happen in a narcissist, is they need to create the image, and maintain the image, of being better than everybody, smarter than everybody. And what they will do, to do that, is criticize stuff. Another thing that can happen, where this critical negative mindset, plays a role, is wanting everybody to agree with you. And feeling that if they don't agree with you, they're saying that you're stupid, they're saying that you're not good enough, it triggers your shame. And what a lot of people can do, when somebody doesn't agree with them, is before you say I'm stupid, I'm gonna say you're stupid. And I'm gonna criticize you. I'm gonna put you down, and it's their way of responding, to people not agreeing with them. And , I'm gonna criticize you, and I'm gonna criticize you, and I'm gonna criticize you. And what you do is, you're responding to people not agreeing with them. Another thing that people do, is if somebody comes and says, you need to change, what you're doing as a parent, in how you respond to your kids in this area, because you're doing a lot of damage. you don't , that message, it exposes you, and you don't want to look at that area, and you don't want to listen to that message. what do you do? You discount the messenger. you're a jerk, you don't know what you're talking about, look at your kids, they're not perfect. if I can discount the messenger, then I don't have to listen to their message. And then the final one. People with a lot of shame, complex trauma, who don't feel good about themselves, can easily resent when others, who are also on the recovery journey, succeed, get promoted, get asked to do a job, that they weren't asked to do. And now, their way of resenting the success of others, is to tear that person down. 22 purposes, that being negative and critical, filled in the lives of people from complex trauma. How did you do? How many of those, have you used in your life, often without realizing why you do it, or seeing how often you do it? And I hope you see just how big of an issue, it can be. But that takes us to the next thing. Because being negative and critical, operates as a default setting for most from complex trauma, they're often in that state, or that mindset, totally unaware that they're there. And , it can do a lot of stuff in their brain, without them even noticing, that they've gone to that negative place.