welcome to another Friday night. Tonight I want to talk about an aspect of trauma that you may not have heard before but it's such an important piece to understand. It's called betrayal trauma and why it's such an important piece to understand is because it's part of complex trauma. complex trauma is technically different than betrayal trauma but all complex trauma for children especially contains betrayal trauma and for many of you who've gone through complex trauma as children the trauma is very painful but it's the betrayal of those that are supposed to love you that aren't don't have your back that's even more painful and it's really important to get a com if one is to get a complete picture of their life in this complex trauma to understand this betrayal part this betrayal trauma that's included in it and that's what I want to look at today and for many of you I think as I go through this it's going to actually be kind of painful. It's going to stir up some painful memories of being betrayed by those that were supposed to love you and I hope that it also leads to healing that it helps you better understand some of the of your trauma and what you can do in practical steps to begin to heal that part of the trauma. let's begin with the definition of betrayal trauma. here's kind of a technical one. Betrayal trauma occurs when the people or institutions on which a person depends for survival significantly violate that person's trust or -being. Betrayal trauma is the result of a violation of deep attachment. it takes place within attachment relationships. That is important to understand. there's an attachment relationship and then within that relationship there's abuse. you're in a situation where you're being abused or neglect by the person that you're depending on for your safety and -being. That is betrayal trauma. you need this person, you attach to this person, and they let you down. another thing by Sabrina Romanoff from Yeshiva University. Betrayal trauma describes the emotional impact a person experiences after their trauma. Betrayal trauma is when a person's trust or -being is violated either by people or institutions that are significant in their life. Institutions that they rely on for survival. This type of trauma usually relates to primary attachment figures a parent, caregiver, or other important relationships from childhood. In adulthood it tends to repeat itself among romantic partners. betrayal trauma is when a person is in a relationship with a partner that is not a partner.iley trauma then is a term for relational trauma. It suffered when a person on whom you thought you could rely, a person you thought you could trust and you choose to trust violates that trust significantly. a child comes into the world, and they have to attach to their parents because they're too little to provide for their own needs. they need attachment in order to survive. and they're put in a position of total dependence on these two people that are supposed to love them but then what happens is these two people don't meet their needs don't protect them neglect them abuse them they betray that trust the more dependent we are on someone and the more we trust them the more severe the betrayal trauma will be when we are betrayed if you think of that again in context of complex trauma basically all complex trauma includes betrayal trauma because this child is dependent on these people that are supposed to love them and then they are hurt betrayed by them there's five different types of betrayal trauma that have been kind of classified number one that we've been talking about is parental trauma when someone who's supposed to love you someone on whom you're dependent abuses you neglects you fails to protect you from harm fails to meet your needs that is betrayal by the very people the people that most should have your back that most should be there for you that is huge betrayal then the second one is that the person who is supposed to love you is someone who is second type is an intimate partner and many of you relate to this and you experience betrayal trauma as a child from your parents you get older you get in a relationship and then that partner also betrays you somebody who says they love you somebody who says they want your best somebody who says they have your back somebody who says you can trust them and then they abuse you they neglect you they cheat on you they lie to you feel greatly betrayed that is really painful then you can go beyond intimate partner to just interpersonal relationship betrayal trauma where you thought you had a trusted friend you thought you had somebody that you could depend on and they let you down they betray your trust and it doesn't hurt as much as intimate partner trauma or parental trauma betrayal trauma but it still hurts because it is a betrayal let me take that one to a fourth category which for many is very significant and that is feeling betrayed by betrayal you grew up in a religion where you were taught that would always be there for you he would protect you he would answer your prayers if you were a good child and you heard stories of doing this for others but then as a child you hit a time of crisis you're sexually abused you're bullied you're physically abused you you expect that this you're trusting is going to help you but does nothing and you feel totally betrayed by that is a severe form of betrayal trauma the fifth one is institutional trauma and it's an institution that you have to depend on for survival the government school but it's an institution that says kind of maybe even they're in their model that they this is what they're about caring for people helping people being there for people teaching people supporting people but then they don't live out that in their relationship with you another type of institutional trauma is let's say somebody within the institution abuse you physically sexually verbally emotionally you report it but then the institution does nothing about it they protect the perpetrator they don't report the crime that is a type of betrayal trauma again let me just apply this to a common institution that many people feel betrayed by and that would be the and again a form of spiritual abuse that has a betrayal trauma aspect many people have joined a and we're told by the we'll love you unconditionally we accept you just the way you are and they get involved in the and for a while it seems that is true this has been just wonderful theyivanus.com a part of, totally accepted, but then all of a sudden something changes. And it can be in kind of two areas. All of a sudden you challenge their belief system, their dogma. You ask questions, you say you're not sure you fully agree with them. And all of a sudden you're an outcast. They condemn you, they judge you, you're shunned. Or let's say that all of a sudden you get a divorce or you come out that you're gay. And they say, nope, nope, nope, nope, that's not allowed, that's not allowed. And all of a sudden you're no longer accepted, you're no longer unconditionally loved. There's all these conditions now if you don't keep their rules and you're shunned because of that. Or somebody in that sexually abuses you. And that's a type of institutional betrayal. Trauma that sadly many have experienced. let me just give you some more examples that might help just really drive home what I'm talking about with this betrayal trauma. any type of childhood, physical, emotional, or sexual abuse perpetrated by your caregiver, the person that's supposed to care for you, is abusing you. That is betrayal trauma. What many go through in complex trauma is their parents get a divorce. And all of a sudden they go to live with one parent, hardly see the other parent, they feel betrayed. They feel let down, they can no longer trust their parents. And that's a type of betrayal. Or their parents say we can't take care of you anymore and put them into the foster care system or put them up for adoption. And they're not able to take care of you anymore. And they're not able to take care of you anymore and put them into the foster care system. Or there's a kid who's getting involved with something, or a kid who's getting involved as a burden, who's me series is prioritizing. Then their family. And that child being blamed for a lot of bad behavior. Or Kat is telling people, they're relying on denial of what happens in our life. Or just that child винm And there's children that are sleeping with their parents. Or there's children that are It's aication. That channeling. , think about it. What happens? What happens to you? You don't hear anyone talk about it. What happens if you give out lipsticks a sentence in Dell? What happens if you put it in a department store. But you, instead of talking about it. When you read it, you do it out loud. of betrayal trauma is when you find out that long-term deceit has been happening within a relationship. Then it's a huge type of betrayal. Another one is that you find out there's been some secrets being kept from you. they've been doing stuff, but not talking about it, keeping it a secret. That's a form of betrayal. Or you share in confidence with your parents about a struggle, about something going on in your life. And all of a sudden you find out they've been talking to other people about what you shared in confidence. That's betrayal. Or your parents have made promises to you that you're going to do this. They're going to do this for you. And then they break those promises. That's a form of betrayal. Or you thought your parents loved you and because you're children that you came ahead of other priorities in their life. But all of a sudden you find out their job is more important than you. Their addiction is more important than you. Their friends are more important than you. Even strangers can be more important than you. And there's a huge sense of betrayal that comes out of that. Another one is when you're in a relationship with someone who's been doing something that you've never done before. And you're in a relationship with someone who's been doing something that you've never done before. Family makes fun of you in public. They expose some of your idiosyncrasies, some of your things that they would consider weaknesses, and they make fun of you. That's a serious type of betrayal. Or you've been living with a parent who's been making all these rules and telling you that they're for your best. And then you find out no, no, this leader was all about me rather than we. This parent made the rules because it suited them. It had nothing to do with what was best for us, only what was best for them. That's a form of betrayal. Then think of grooming. What happens in grooming? Grooming is actually breaking down natural cautions and inhibitions in a child and getting them to trust. you give them gifts. You're super nice to them. You do things for them. All of that to get them to trust you, and then you abuse them. Huge betrayal. And then sadly, many of you have gone through infidelity, where you've been in a relationship with a partner who said they've loved you, and then they've cheated on you. And that can be physical, cheating on you, or they can have an emotional affair. They can get involved. They can get involved in a relationship with somebody where they're sharing very, very deeply, vulnerably, not telling you much of what's going on in their life, but telling somebody else. That's a deep form of betrayal. Or you find out that your partner is deeply involved in sexual addiction and looking at pornography all the time, and that feels a great form of betrayal to you as . Then you're going to get the situation where you're going to get a lot of people who are going to say, let's say somebody has cheated on you. And they come back and they are sorry. I'll never do it again. Give me another chance. And in that time of crisis, they take a program. They ask for help. They go for counseling. And you decide, I'll give them another chance. And you do. And it looks for a while, they have changed. But then they do it all over again. And it's a second type of betrayal. A second time of betrayal. And it hurts just as bad. Another one many of you went through is if the family kind of saw you as the scapegoat. if something went wrong, you got blamed for it. Even though you had done nothing wrong, even though it was somebody else's fault, it was made to be your fault. That's a form of betrayal. When you're blamed for everybody else's mistakes. The final one I want to give as an example is anytime that you're in a relationship with a narcissist, you will end up betrayed. Because the narcissist doesn't know how to love people just to use people. The narcissist is ultimately what matters. Even though they say they love you and that you matter, ultimately what matters to them is they themselves getting what they want. And any relationship with a narcissist, you will eventually at some point experience betrayal. those are a whole bunch of examples that just hopefully help you begin to realize that this has probably been a part of your life. That you've experienced betrayal trauma. what I think is important to understand is that betrayal trauma is more than just the traumatic event and the pain of that traumatic event. It's a trauma where the pain goes even deeper. It hurts even more. And the question is why? Why does betrayal trauma hurt more than any other trauma? And I think it's due to that bonding, that attachment piece. somebody has said this, intimate bonding with another person serves an important developmental role. It enhances the child, chances of survival. a baby comes in, they can't be thrown these, they need to attach. They need to attach to somebody if they're going to survive. Somebody who will meet their needs for them. And as a result of that, they form this deep emotional connection. And that's the key piece. And as a result, there are biological substrates that support the formation of psychologically intimate relationships. betrayal adversely affects these substrates. The psychological injury of betrayal is likely to create in a sense, a functional physical injury within the brain that is challenging to recover from, but not impossible. what it's saying is that when you securely attach as a child, it sets off a whole bunch of, of dynamics inside of your brain, inside of your body, your emotions. And when you're betrayed, all of those get damaged. And those are very, very hard to recover from. I asked myself, what does being betrayed feel ? And you can make your own list, but let me just get you started on it. Many people who've been betrayed will say I got stabbed in the back. I didn't see it coming from the front. It was sneaky. I got stabbed in the back. Others will say, I got punched in the gut. It just knocked the wind out of me. It's the air was taken out of my sails. I got hit by a truck. My heart got ripped out and stomped on. you're just trying to put into words with metaphors, how painful this is. It just , it just sucks the life out of you. Some people, say it feels I died or it feels somebody else died. Or some go, it feels I'm just a pawn in somebody else's chess game. I don't matter. I'm just going to be used to advance their agenda. Others talk about the deep shock, the deep confusion that they feel. Others talk about feeling a deep rage. And then others talk about, it's , nobody's there for me anymore. I feel abandoned. I feel all alone in the world. what I want you to see from that is , all of those are attempts to put into words, some extremely intense, painful emotions. And that's what betrayal trauma is. Extremely intense pain. that then leads to, how does a child, respond when they begin to figure out that they've been betrayed? again, what you have to realize is the child thought they were being loved unconditionally. And all of a sudden they realize they're not. That is a hard thing to get your brain around. That is a painful reality, more painful than any other reality that they've experienced in their life far. the child, child has a problem. They are betrayed, but they still need this person because they can't meet all their needs yet. And they're going through a lot of pain and betrayal. Part of them wants to run away. Part of them wants to shut down, but they need this person. And they have to adapt in order to still maintain this relationship they can get their needs met. And that's the challenge for the child. Is I need this relationship, even though they're betraying me. What do I need to do to maintain the relationship? Because my life depends on it, even though they don't really care about me as much as they say they do. And there's what you can see up front is that creates a ton of cognitive dissonance in the mind of a child. They have two conflicting thoughts. The parents, are meeting some of my needs, kind of love me, but they don't fully unconditionally love me. Those you can't reconcile. And you have to live with two dissonant thoughts, which is not fun to live with. It creates pain and tension in your brain because it can't resolve it. And that's why many children need to live with constant busyness and distractions. Because I don't want to think. I don't want to have quiet time where my brain starts to think. Think about this painful stuff. The second thing a child will do is they will minimize or downplay the severity of the betrayal. , it's not that big a deal. Everybody goes through it. It's not they do this to me or that to me. And there's an attempt to reduce the pain by trying to minimize the severity of what's happening to them. Some go far as to, block the betrayal from their mind. And they develop what is called dissociative amnesia. They don't even think about it. They forget about it. They just block it. Their brain is not allowed to go to that betrayal, that reality in their life because it's just too painful. And the child develops ways in their brain to block their brain from ever going back. Going there to ignore them because they need this relationship. they can't be honest about this relationship. And then another one, which is slightly different, but really important to understand is what we call betrayal blindness. the previous one is you block from your mind that this is even happening. But in betrayal blindness is you refuse. To admit the reality about this person. You want to see them with rose-colored glasses because you need them. there's a blindness that comes from, I need to maintain this relationship at all costs. I'm going to be blind to what this person is really or what they're doing. it's a form of psychological blindness. That protects the individual's mental and emotional safety by blocking out. What is too painful or too frightening to confront. And what a child might do is instead of blaming dad for betraying them, they might go to while it's my fault. They blame themselves. I deserved it. I caused it. I shouldn't have done what I did. It's my bad behavior. It's not my parents fault. That's betrayal blindness. And that happens a lot in complex trauma and it results in that shame belief that it's me. That's the problem. But let me go beyond that. those are the four most common childhood responses. But what? What's a bigger picture of how we respond to betrayal as we move into adult life. I want to break this into different areas. emotional symptoms when you've been betrayed, what are common emotional symptoms that you're going to experience? , you're going to go through a time of shock denial disbelief. just think of finding out that your partner cheated on you, that your partner has been lying to you, that your partner has been texting somebody else and sharing their heart with somebody else, that your partner spent all your money. You are in shock. You just can't believe it. Then you can go to a deep grief. You are just overwhelmed with a deep sadness, often even a hopelessness. Life just is negative, painful, dark. But then you can go to that deep anger, rage. Then you can go to just fear. What now? What's going to happen in my life? And everything is scary. And then you can get paranoid and almost have this kind of terror that you live with. Some go to guilt. I must have done something wrong. It's probably my fault. And that's that self-blame stuff that we just talked about. Others go, it triggers their shame at a deep level. See that proves I'm not worth anything. I'm not lovable. I'm not valuable. If I was they wouldn't have done this. And it just reinforces the deep shame messages. Others just go numb. It's too much to take in. They just go to not feeling anything. And they detach from, others. They just don't want to be with anybody. They just want to be alone. And they're just numb. Then it can lead to just this haunting loneliness. That the person I thought loved me has betrayed me. I am all alone and it is overwhelming. And then often a deep feeling of being violated. Then another thing that begins often to happen emotionally with people is, after they've been betrayed, they have a great deal of difficulty regulating their emotions. all of a sudden they have massive mood swings several times a day, or they get triggered and they just go from zero to hundred in a nanosecond and they can't stop it. emotional regulation becomes a problem. Others then begin to struggle with depression, anxiety, worry, panic attacks. Some go to this apathy. They lose all motivation for life. The things that they used to enjoy, they don't do anything for them anymore. They're just blah. Some go to suicidal ideation. What's the point of living? And then there's a term that's called alexothymia. And this would come out of a child being betrayed in complex trauma. And it's also called emotional blindness. And it's a neuropsychological phenomenon. Characterized by significant challenges in recognizing, expressing and describing one's own emotions. this is a person who as a child is betrayed. It's too much to deal with. they just shut down. And they don't feel anymore. And then they disconnect from their emotional world. And they don't even know how to recognize emotions anymore. They don't know what emotions are. They don't even feel emotions. That's alexothymia. And that can happen out of betrayal trauma. Then there's cognitive symptoms of betrayal trauma. And again, if you've been cheated on, etc. What can happen in the days and months that follow is you can have flashbacks and nightmares. You can relive it. And you can be going through your day and all of a sudden have intrusive thoughts. You just start thinking about it. And you didn't even want to think about it. But it just intrudes into your thought life. Another thing is that you can begin to have memory issues. you forget stuff short-term stuff. Other people is deep confusion. And it's almost at an existential level. what's the purpose of living? Who am I? Do I matter? Who cares about life? All of those questions deep confusion. And then you start thinking about where you're going in life. What to do next? It just becomes this very confusing time. And then you can become very difficult to concentrate. And you get distracted easily. You just can't get focused. That's a common symptom after a person's been betrayed. Then dissociation. It's almost you feel detached from reality. You're just zombie mode. You're just in the middle of a series of life, but you're not there. For some, there's even a sense of time slows down or even stops. They're just not connected to the present. Others then have trouble making decisions. They don't trust their ability to make decisions anymore. Because they've just been betrayed by somebody they thought they could trust. Somebody they decided to trust. And it really starts to mess up. And making decisions for themselves. And then for many, it unleashes kind of these persistent negative beliefs about life. They get really cynical. They get cynical about themselves, about the world, about people. And some of the persistent negative stuff can be shame messages. They go back to the inner critic. It's your fault. You're not good enough. You don't matter. They can't see it that moment that it's made up of all lies. Because it feels the truth. Somebody just betrayed me. And shame messages get louder. And with that is, I guess I'm just a burden to everybody. I guess nobody's ever going to want me. I just don't matter. People only show love. They love to me when it's convenient. When they can get something from me. And those messages spin around. And then you can go to nobody's there for me. Nobody can be trusted in the world. I'm all alone. And that just gets darker and darker. But those are the kind of thoughts that begin to fill the brain. And create constant chatter in the brain. Then there's some negative thoughts. Then there's some physical symptoms that can happen after you've been betrayed. And these I think are really important to understand. again, just think you just find out your husband's cheated on you. You can go to physically shaking. And then you can just be constantly agitated. You can't sit still. You can't calm yourself. Your legs jiggling all the time. Then you can just be sweating a lot. I've had quite ażyed, Stuck with oneüs. I would call it that. But, Everything in your life starts here. Now, You can act around the audience that could be a city or, With your eyes started, up or they have a racing heartbeat others all of a sudden you get aches and pains you get muscle tension you get inflammation all of a sudden that happens or you get migraines headaches that you don't normally get or you're just tired all the time you can sleep all the time or you can't sleep at all but you're tired all the time those are some of the physical symptoms that can happen after you realize you've been betrayed that leads to behavioral symptoms that often happen with people that have been freshly betrayed i just want to isolate from people i can't face anybody i don't want to have to explain i don't want to have to talk i'm going to isolate and then crying frequently just can't stop crying decrease in self-care don't take care of yourself don't shut up and don't cry or don't cry or don't cry don't cry or and that can happen a lot of times that's what is happening and you can have anxiety a lot of times you can have anxiety what i do know is that there's another thing about you can be in a bad situation where you're in a bad situation or you're in a bad situation it can happen for example you're in a bad situation don't eat properly, don't sleep properly. All of that can happen. Don't do the things that you used to do as healthy self-care or escapes healthy hobbies. You just can't work as much. And there's a decrease in your work productivity. There's an increase or decrease in your eating. We've talked about that. For some, there's an increase in aggressiveness, in reactivity. The person says the slightest little thing to you and you go into attack mode and you lash out. That can happen. Others just spend all their time on social media. That just numbs them out. They just scroll through page after page of social media. Others go into just buying stuff. And they make all kinds of unnecessary purchases. It's a way of numbing. It's a way of making a living. It's a way of making a living. It's a way of making a living. It's a way of getting out of that pain for a while. others go to alcohol and drugs. It's a way of numbing. It's a way of getting out of the pain. Some go to reckless behavior. They drive radically. They all of a sudden do stuff that potentially is quite risky. They could die, but part of them doesn't care. If I die, I die. And there's an increase in risky behavior. Then there's relationship symptoms that come out of it, and they're more long term for people. they have been betrayed. Now they are looking at starting a relationship again, just a friendship. It's not necessarily romantic. Could be, but it's not necessarily. But all of a sudden they find that they're struggling to open up. They're struggling. They're struggling with any kind of deeper intimacy that just scares them. They can even be suspicious of kindness. somebody super kind to them and they go, are they grooming me? Is there, what do they want? Is there a hidden agenda here? And they have huge trust issues. They don't know if they can ever trust again. they're suspicious of everything. And then if they do get in a relationship, they have difficulty maintaining that. And they're just kind of getting it out of their head. that relationship. Every little thing the person does, they overanalyze, they look for negative, they look for signs of betrayal, they pull away, they test the other person. And they have difficulty maintaining relationships. And then if the other person is wanting to get closer and get to know them better, they're not comfortable with that. they're kind of resisting that or pushing people away. And then they can have jealousy issues. They start to get in a relationship. And every time that person talks to somebody else, they just, it stirs up stuff and they get super jealous. And that can cause trouble. And then they can have an ODD, oppositional defiance. they get in a relationship and the person says, I think you should do this, or here's what I think we should do. And it's almost something. Something is triggered inside of them that I want to do the opposite. I am not going to follow anybody's advice. I'm not going to trust anybody's advice. I have to make all my decisions by myself. Then for some, now when they get in a relationship to them, if I'm not going to be betrayed by you and I'm going to be able to trust you, then there can be no boundaries. You can never say no to me. You can never say you need some personal space. And they resist boundaries. And boundaries to them proves you aren't loyal. You don't love me. You don't care. what you can see is betrayal trauma sets a person up to have great difficulty in future relationships. And that is what most people realize is their biggest challenge as they come out of betrayal trauma. There's one other thing that happens. There's one other thing that happens with betrayal trauma that includes sexual abuse. And that is there's sexual symptoms in the future. And there can be an aversion to sex. Sex just makes me feel dirty. Sex makes me feel awful. It's disgusting. And it just triggers much painful stuff. I don't want sex. Or if I do have sex, it's just I do it out of obligation. It's not something I enjoy. But I do. I do it out of obligation. Some become just uncomfortable with any physical touch. Sexual touch doesn't even have to be intercourse. It's just touch me in any way that feels sexual. And I just feel this revulsion inside. Some aren't able to ever achieve orgasm again. Some during sex, they just check out of their body. They feel distant. They dissociate. Others. They regularly have sexual flashbacks. Dreams about the sexual abuse. Intrusive thoughts about the sexual abuse. Others have actually physical pain in their sexual organs. That is an ongoing thing. And then others have shame. Sexual shame about what happened. Body shame about what happened. And there's huge ongoing results or ramifications. That come out of betrayal trauma related to sexual abuse. There's one other area that is significant for some. And that's where that betrayal trauma is experienced in your relationship with your higher power. That you feel has let you down. has betrayed you. And all of a sudden you're dealing with anger with . these are spiritual symptoms. You blame your higher power for that. You blame your higher power for that. You blame your higher power for your problems. And you lose interest in . In meditation. In going to . In meeting with other people in your spiritual support group. You question everything. You just feel totally abandoned by . You doubt that even exists. But yet you fear that 's upset with you and is going to judge you. And that other people in your religion are judging you. And that's got massive ramifications as . I hope you're really getting a feel for the fact that this betrayal trauma is huge. And it has massive ramifications. It's not just painful. It just messes up a whole bunch of life. For years and years and years. And what I hope you begin to realize is. Wow. You can heal from this. But it is going to take some work to heal from this. And it's going to take some special tools to heal from this. what are some of the tools that help people heal from betrayal trauma? And again I want to emphasize there's no quick fix. Healing from betrayal trauma is a slow, slow process. And it takes consistent work over a period of months. And years to begin to heal from this. number one. Acknowledge the betrayal. Don't keep trying to minimize it or avoid it. you have to start by validating I was betrayed. And it hurt crazy. start with that honesty. That sees it accurately and acknowledges it. That is painful. But that is the first step in beginning to heal. Secondly. Don't blame yourself. For a child to be betrayed is never the child's fault. don't blame yourself. develop self compassion. To that child and to yourself today. That is absolutely essential. Now if you've been betrayed. In adult life. And you are going back and wanting to heal from being cheated on. Your partner having spent all your money and didn't tell you about it. Learn from it. Go back and go. Why didn't I see the warning signs? Why was I attracted to somebody who's dishonest and who's that? What is it that I can learn from I don't repeat this in adult relationships? And is there something in me that's attracted to somebody that I need to look at? turn this into a huge growth opportunity. A time. A chance to really learn. Next thing is. Once you fully validate it. See it accurately. Expect. Now you're going to go through the stages of grief. You're going to go through shock. Anger. Depression. Confusion. Bargaining. And then finally reach acceptance. But you're going to go through a process of starting to come to terms with it. That's going to take months to get through. But it will follow the stages of grief process. The next thing is. Because what happens for children who've gone through betrayal trauma. Is they have to become blind to what's happened. They have to shut down emotionally. Disconnect from the emotions of it. They have to really learn. How to feel emotions. Identify emotions. Accept emotions. Value emotions. Express emotions. They have to learn emotional intelligence. And that begins by beginning to practice identifying your emotions. Naming your emotions. Feeling them in your body. Feeling them in your emotional world. And then accepting your emotions. begin to do that. I want to give a caution here. For a lot of people when they realize that they've been betrayed. They'll get a response from many -meaning people that want to pressure them. You need to forgive that person. And my response to that is. Don't let somebody pressure you into. You need to forgive. It doesn't work. What you need to do is. Allow yourself. To grieve the pain. Allow yourself to process through the pain of that betrayal trauma. Eventually you'll get to forgiveness. But after it's going to be the result of having worked through all of the pain honestly. And just be cautious of people that try to rush you to forgive before. Actually your brain is ready to forgive. The next piece is. Accept the fact. That rebuilding trust. And learning how to find safe people is going to be a slow process. You're not going to be able to meet somebody and immediately be able to go. , I can trust you 100. Not after you've been betrayed. You need to gradually get to know a person. And that's going to take months. And you're going to gradually trust them a little bit to see if they're trustworthy. If they are, then you're going to have to trust them. If they are, then you trust them a bit more. And then a bit more. And gradually trust builds. And we don't that slow process. Because when we're in that process. There's an element of the unknown. Are they going to be fully trustworthy? Are they going to maybe still let me down? And we got to sit in this unknown and we don't it. But there's no other way to gradually build trust again. And have healthy relationships. The next thing is know your triggers. if you've been betrayed, you've got a whole bunch of things that will trigger those betrayal feelings. And once those betrayal feelings are triggered, then you're going to feel you're being betrayed again. When probably you're not. But you're triggered and it feels it. you think it must be happening. let's look at this. Let's say somebody comes up to you and says, Oh, I was just talking to somebody and they talked about you. Somebody's been talking behind my back. They probably were saying negative things. And all of a sudden you feel betrayed. And you think that friend betrayed you by talking to this other friend. They might have just been saying good things about you. But it triggers something. Or let's say somebody you've known for a while. All of a sudden reveals a secret to you. That they haven't shared before. And you feel they've been betraying you by having not revealed that secret before. Because that's what happened in your past. But maybe they hadn't revealed that secret because they weren't sure they could fully trust you yet. But it feels betrayal. Or let's say somebody confronts you. And they speak the truth about what you're doing and that it's not . , that feels they don't have your back. That feels they're turning against you. They're not loyal. That feels betrayal. Or let's say you're getting to know a friend. And you really this friend. And all of a sudden you see them over having a chat, a deep conversation with somebody else. That triggers the feelings of betrayal. Or somebody is super nice to you. That triggers feeling you're being groomed. And know your triggers. Because your triggers put you in your limbic brain which has distorted reasoning and lies. And if you realize I'm being triggered, you can get back to your cortex and say, That's what I feel but what is the truth? And that becomes very, very important. The final thing is if you've gone through betrayal trauma, hopefully you realize this is a big, big topic. With huge ramifications into every area of life. I would really encourage you to get help. Professional help. Get into a program our LIFT program. And we deal with this stuff all the time. Get to a therapist who understands betrayal trauma. A support group where you can talk with others who understand betrayal trauma. All of that is important in healing from this. You often can't do it totally. You can't do it. You're completely alone. You need professional help. Now I just give you a caution. That one of the things that if you get in a support group, which I hope you will, is that then you can be in danger of trauma bonding. you find out somebody else that's betrayed deeply in similar ways to you. And you have a connection. And all of a sudden you go, Oh, I just feel close to this person. But they're messed up. You're messed up. And you get in this relationship. And then you get betrayed again. just be aware of trauma bonding that can take place between two people that have gone through betrayal trauma. , this has been a tough topic. But I hope it's been insightful. Because you can't understand complex trauma unless you understand that it includes betrayal trauma. And it is painful stuff with far-reaching impact. That's the end of our time.