But last week we started a new series on codependency. And what I said in that opening talk on that was, in my experience as an addictions counselor, one of the main causes of things that lead people to a relapse is they get into a relationship that is a codependent relationship. And before we know it, they have become back into kind of addicted to a person. And all of their addictive behavior and all of their old ways of doing things kick in. And before it, they're all messed up inside and they end up relapsing to the drugs or alcohol. it is a huge issue that many in recovery have to deal with if they ever want to stay clean and sober. But then I said beyond that, I don't think codependency is properly understood until people understand the complex trauma. And that, to me, is significant because one of the symptoms of complex trauma is it sets people up to become codependent, which means it sets people up that their relationships aren't healthy and end up failing. that's why I want to do this series is because it's such a big issue for people in recovery. It's one of the most common questions that I receive from clients when they are trying to recover. And I think that's a big issue. And I think that's a big issue. And I think that's a big issue. And I think that's a big issue. And I think that's a big issue. I think that's a big issue. I think that's a big issue. I think that's a big issue. And tonight I want to take it a little bit further. And what I want you to understand up front is that when I say codependency, I have a spectrum in my mind. there is kind of mild codependency to severe codependency. you might say, I don't think I'm codependent because I'm not in the severe end of the spectrum. But you might have some of the more mild parts of codependency that still can get you into a lot of trouble in a relationship. taking that, what I want to talk about tonight is the more severe end of the codependency spectrum. And when you get to the more severe end of the codependency spectrum, a word comes into play that has become a very popular word, and it's called narcissism. And when you are in the more severe end of the codependency spectrum, there's usually a narcissist who's part of that relationship. But what I want you to understand tonight is in order for a narcissist to be in a relationship, there's got to be a co-narcissist. And I will explain that in a little bit. And my hunch would be that most of you here would either fall in the category of a narcissist or a co-narcissist. Now, they're supposed to be on the back of your handout, a test that you can take to see if you're a narcissist or a co-narcissist. And then, don't do that when I'm talking, because I want you to listen. And I don't want you all of a sudden getting super depressed or super angry or just stomping out because you're mad. I didn't invent the test. It is produced by the American Psychological Society as what they use to measure narcissism and co-narcissism. , let me. Now, take that back to complex trauma. What we have seen is that complex trauma is living in danger basically all the time. you are constantly in survival mode. What happens when you're in survival mode is that you have to make your needs and your survival more important than the needs of others. you put yourself in a narcissistic place. ? Your needs now matter. You now matter more than anything else in the world. Now, what happens in one-event trauma is in survival mode, fight, flight, freeze, you put your needs and yourself ahead of everybody else until the danger passes, and then you come back down to feeling and acting equal to everybody, and you enter into loving relationships again where you value them and they value you just as much. The tragedy of complex trauma, is you're constantly living in danger, you're constantly living with you mattering more than anybody else. complex trauma sets you up to become a narcissist. That's what you had to do to survive. Now, I'm not beating you up by saying that. I'm saying that's what survival mode that happens 24-7 looks . Your needs have to become more important than everybody else, complex trauma is the birthplace of narcissism. ? Now, let me take that a little bit further. The other effect of complex trauma is that the child is abused, abandoned, or neglected, and they conclude it's their fault. it develops shame. the greater the abuse, the greater the neglect, the greater the abandonment, the more it's a problem. ? The more the child takes home the message and personalizes that I must not matter at all, I must be totally unlovable, I must have zero value, and they develop this belief about themselves that they are not good enough, they're less than. the greater the trauma, the greater the shame. Now, with that in mind, what I want you to understand is that narcissism is a response to severe shame. when a person is in a place where they feel totally they're nothing because of severe trauma, they have severe shame, that is no fun to live with. Who wants to walk around saying, I suck, I'm useless, nobody, everybody should know I'm totally unlovable and have zero value. No, that is just way too depressing to live with. That is just way too painful to live with. the brain begins to develop ways of trying to get rid of that. narcissism, to understand it correctly, it is the brain doing everything possible to either deny that it has any shame at all, or to overcompensate and feel that it doesn't have any shame, it tries to disprove that there's any shame at all, and tries to prove that it has great value, that it is totally lovable, and it goes to the place that I'm better than everybody. narcissism comes out of complex trauma as a response to severe trauma and severe shame. That's what I want you to understand up front. Now let me take it a bit further. response number one to severe shame is the narcissist. I am better than everybody. And the way I will make my life is that I will try to be the center of the universe. And everybody needs to revolve around me because life is now going to be all about me. there you are, center of the universe. Everybody is now in an orbit, around you, taking their cues from you about how they should act, what emotions they should show, and making sure that you're happy. that's how codependency begins. Now what I want you to understand with that is that narcissism is a big monster that needs to be fed all the time. a narcissist needs somebody adoring him all the time. That's how he's fed. guess what that creates is what we call a co-narcissist or a mirror or an echo that reflects back to the narcissist. You're wonderful. I adore you. You're such a beautiful person. And the narcissist is getting fed. narcissists don't go into relationships with a healthy person who's not going to feed them. They go look at them. They're looking for a co-narcissist who will feed them and reflect back to them a mirror how wonderful they are. That is the co-narcissist thing. Now what you have to understand about the co-narcissist is they walk around saying, I'm awful. I'm terrible. They don't try to compensate for their shame. They give in to their shame. And they are depressed. They are feeling bad. They are feeling terrible about themselves. They hate themselves. They live with that feeling all the time. Guess what they want? A narcissist to be the sun of their world who comes in and shines their light on them and says, I you. Let me help you. I'll fix you. And they go, oh, I do have value. This important person just noticed me and wants to help me. And now you have the sun and the planet working beautifully together. That is a narcissist and that is a co-narcissist. , let me take that a bit further. that goes beyond just the couple, ? there you are, the sun of the universe. Everything has to revolve around you. The co-narcissist says, let me take care of your emotions. You're sad. Let me make you happy. You're angry. Let me fix your problems. You're in trouble. Let me make all your bad consequences go away. And they give up all their . They make all kinds of sacrifices to keep the sun of their universe happy because they can't be happy unless the sun is happy. And that's codependency, ? But it spreads beyond the couple to the family. now what you have is a narcissist who abandons and neglects and abuses everybody who doesn't give them what they want. they are this black hole that just sucks everything, but they're never satisfied. And the children get neglected because the narcissist is all wrapped up pursuing their selfish endeavors. The children get abandoned or abused if they don't cooperate with the narcissist. , children don't living that. That's painful. children in their own mind are trying to solve the family problems that arise when a narcissist is the sun within the family system. And children will adopt different roles to try to fix the family and to try to make the narcissist happy. And each child will try different things as a way to solve their family problems and to try to get the narcissist to meet their needs and validate them and not neglect them or abuse them. that's where you get the child that says, I'll be a hero. I will be the perfect child. I will never cause problems. I will do extra chores. I will get straight A's at school. I will never get a fighter in trouble. I will do all kinds of things extra around the house just to make everything run smoothly. Trying to solve the problem. Then you get the comedian child who says, there's a whole lot of pain in this family. The way to solve it is to be funny and laughing all the time. I'll be the jokester, the comedian, the storyteller, and I'll make everybody happy. And that'll fix our family. And then the invisible child says, I'll have no needs. I will fade into the background. I'll never ask for anything. I'll hide out in my room that I don't add any extra stress to this family because it is not in a good place. each child can try different ones. They can try all three. Most will settle in on one. But what they're going to find as they get older is it didn't fix the thing. The narcissist wasn't happy. The narcissist didn't meet their needs. The narcissist didn't validate them. And they took it personally and developed their own shame and said, it's my fault. I'm the problem. And that creates the next generation of codependent people. , that's how it begins. Now I'm going to give you a very psychological analysis tonight to see if you're a narcissist. ? if you were to go to the DSM or the diagnostic manual that is used to determine narcissists and look through the literature around how can you tell if a person's a narcissist, you would come up with these 18 criteria. You don't have to meet all 18, but you got to meet at least half of them, ? here we go. A narcissist, if you don't know what a narcissist, where it comes from, let me quickly give you the back story. It comes from a Greek myth. back in a long time ago in Greece, before there were ever mirrors, you never saw a reflection of yourself. And one day this guy named narcissist, he goes out to get a drink of water at the pond. And it's nice and calm that day and the sun's shining just and he looks into the pond to get a drink of water and he sees his reflection. And he goes, that is the handsomest guy I've ever seen in my life. I fall in love with you. I'm coming back every day just to look at myself and admire myself and how beautiful I am. That's where narcissism came from. That's the idea, ? number one, they believe they are special and unique, which means they think they're a little bit better than everybody else. But the reason we say they think they're special is they think they can only be understood by special people. what that means is if you call them on your stuff, they have a comeback that says, you don't get me because you're not special. Only the people understand my greatness. they have that system in their mind. Second thing, deep down, they may not say it, they might say it, but they do believe they are more important than other people. That they're smarter, more capable, better in every category almost. Next, they exaggerate their achievements. they didn't just catch a fish this big, they catch a fish this big, ? you get that kind of thing. That kind of exaggeration that takes place. And they expect to be recognized by you as being better than you. they expect you to look up to them and kind of adore them and stand in awe of how great they are. In their private fantasy mind, they have fantasies about how powerful they are and how powerful they're going to be and how successful they are and how attractive they are. And they can sometimes play in their mind, that person said hi to me today. They must be in love with me. And they can just start playing with that in their mind and developing a fantasy that everybody loves them because everybody said hi to them. And that's where they go. I said, they have an insatiable appetite for attention, praise, and admiration. They always are looking for a pat on the back for validation. Now I'm not saying you should never give people a pat on the back, because we should. That's part of being healthy. You validate people on what they're doing. A narcissist just wants it constantly. They're always looking for it. And then in their own mind, they think everybody's jealous of them. They think everybody wishes they could be them. And that, again, is in their own deluded fantasies. A key thing to understand about narcissists is they're all about image. they don't feel good enough inside, but they'll never admit that. they base all of their value on their image. their focus is looking good. they do that through a couple things. They associate with a high status person. if you're a very good-looking woman and you've been with a narcissist, at some point you've wondered, I think I'm just a trophy on his arm. That he wants me on his arm because I make him look good. He doesn't really care about me. He just cares that I make him look better than if he didn't have me. that's what narcissists do. And then if it's not a woman, then they want to say, I know the president of this, and I know the president of that. And they drop names, and they try to hang out and go for coffee with very influential people because it makes them look good. Then they try to control how you think about them. if they do something that maybe wasn't appropriate, they now will send you emails to explain away what they did and to tell you what you should conclude about them. they put a lot of energy into managing their image and trying to control how other people think of them. Then arrogance, or they're just, their nose is a little bit in the air, a bit of snobbishness is there. Now, if you've been in a relationship with a narcissist, you'll understand this next one. They must never, they must never be wrong. Because their image says you, they always have to be . if you are in a conflict with a narcissist, they will never admit they're wrong, but rather, they will take what happened and twist it to make you wrong. And they will take what you say and twist it to make you wrong. what I say to people, don't argue with a narcissist, because the more you try to convince them of your truth, the more they're going to twist what you say and use it against you. Because they must never be wrong. And then, at first a narcissist can act very caring, but as their true colors come out, you find they don't really have much empathy or care for other people's needs or feelings at all. Rather, they're, it's all about me, causes them to feel very entitled. That you owe me special treatment. You have to meet all of my needs. I don't have to meet any of your needs. a relationship with a narcissist is never giving 50-50. It's always lopsided. You're doing the majority of the giving, they're doing all the getting. And that is their sense of entitlement. Then, they don't think rules apply to them. they live by a double standard. Rules apply to you, but not to me. I can go through your phone, you can't go through mine. rules don't apply to them. They're the exception in their mind to every rule. Don't know how you're scoring yourself far, but I'll keep going. What I mean by they're exploitive of others is this. Narcissists are people who are all about manipulating you to meet their needs. Narcissists don't know how to love people, they just know how to use people. Now in their minds, they're being loving. Because they're giving, they're kind in their early days. But what they're really doing is grooming you. They're giving to get. They're playing a long game where I'll give, give, give, give, till I've got past their defenses, and their guards, and they trust me, and then I'll get. that is the manipulation that happens inside of a narcissist. Now to help you understand that, when a person has a lot of shame deep down that they've never acknowledged, they're pretty sure that if people get to know them, nobody will ever want to meet their needs. the only way they can get their needs met is not to express them, but to learn how to manipulate them. And narcissists become master manipulators. They can get good at manipulating, sometimes you're not even aware that they're manipulating you. Usually there's always a hidden agenda that's happening when you're working with a narcissist, and when you first meet a narcissist and they say, tell me about yourself, and you pour out your heart, and tell them about you, and tell them everything about yourself, guess what they're doing? They're taking notes. Oh , here's where I can manipulate them. I got their hot button. Now I know what to use if I want to get something badly. They're taking notes on you. They must feel control, and they must always get what they want. Now this is important to understand from this perspective. Narcissists can be the sweetest, nicest people in the world, 99 of the time, until they don't get what they want. And then you got World War III. They explode, and there is to pay to anybody who has crossed them. what I'm saying is this. Narcissists can act very healthy until they're triggered. And it's those triggers that reveal their true colors. They can no longer hide their deeper stuff once they get triggered. The masks come away, and they come out. some of the main triggers for a narcissist are perceived rejection. if you reject them or say no to them, watch out. Not getting what they want, not getting enough attention. You're not feeding me enough, or anything that messes with their image. what happens if they don't get what they want, or they get triggered? Usually they go to anger, and then they get cruel, abusive, they lash out, they say extremely hurtful things, and they can be very destructive. Just that one trigger can set off a whole lot of painful things, and they can do that, and not even have a conscience about it. you often don't know a person's a narcissist until one of their triggers get triggered. And then their true colors will come out. Another characteristic of a narcissist, because they always have to be fed, is they have a lot of jealousy issues. What happens in an extreme narcissist is this. If you're in a relationship with them, the only way they can be convinced that they're the son of the universe is that there's nobody else in the universe but you. they get rid of all your friends, they get rid of your family, and they demand your full attention. And they're jealous if you talk to anybody else, if you go to an activity somewhere. Without them, jealousy kicks in, and they get really cruel when jealousy kicks in, and their control issues go up a notch. Extreme sensitivity and a tendency to be easily hurt, to feel rejected over the slightest little things. if you're with a healthy person, it takes a lot to really make them feel hurt by something that you might do. A narcissist, they feel hurt when you've hardly done anything. Because they pick up hurt easily because of all of their shame issues. But they're not. But then as soon as they feel hurt, guess whose fault it is? It's not their issues, it's yours, and they think you're just selfish. ? And then they need a mirror. They need that constant reflection. Now let me just say this. that's the 18 characteristics. If you had all 18 of them, you need to talk to me afterwards and go to react. I'm not here to beat up narcissists. Because what happens, what kind of environment creates a narcissist? Severe trauma. Specifically, severe narcissists come out of homes where one of the parents was a severe narcissist. Who belittled them and abused them and put them down and was cruel to them nonstop. And the only way the child could survive was to become a narcissist. And it is an extreme response to extreme cruel treatment. And that is the birthplace of narcissists. , let me end with this. those are the 18 characteristics. Now there's three different types of narcissists. ? number one is the one we normally think of, which is an exhibitionist narcissist. that's the person who's outgoing and is always talking about how wonderful they are, their great dreams, their great accomplishments, and letting how wonderful they are. We're all familiar with that. With the exhibitionist arsonist, what they also do is they put everybody else down a little bit. Or a lot. they build themselves up, put everybody else down. Positive to themselves, negative about everybody else. ? The next one is called a toxic or a malignant narcissist. And that goes a step further. they put themselves up, puts others down. But here's the next part. They're sadistic. They feel alive when they cause pain to other people. They love being cruel and hurting people. It's the bully that just keeps a kid and treats them cruelly every time and just thrives. And just thrives off of causing pain to other people. That's the exhibitionist arsonist. That's the toxic narcissist. Now it goes a little bit further. The toxic narcissist loves to create chaos. they go into a situation and they go, this is way too boring and way too normal and healthy. Let me see if I can just stir it up a bit and get everybody mad at everybody and everybody stressed out and I'll sit back and enjoy the show. That's a toxic narcissist. Final one. The covert narcissist. And that is the person you don't even think is a narcissist because they're quiet. They never put themselves out there. They're shy. They seem depressed and they seem to hate themselves. And you go, how could that be a narcissist? That's the co-narcissist. here's what I want you to see. Do you realize that what the co-narcissist is doing is saying, please make everything all about me. If I love you enough and sacrifice for you enough, will you make your world about me for a little bit? And they give and give and give, hoping to someday be the center of your universe. That is the covert narcissist. Or they say to a narcissist, an exhibitionist, narcissist, not a narcissist, can I hang around with you the moon and will you just reflect your greatness off of me and let me enjoy it? That's the covert narcissist. They're still giving to getting. They're still giving to getting. They're still narcissistic. You just don't see it until they're in a relationship for a long time. I want to have a relationship with . It really gets in the way of having that relationship with . And what I said is that when I deal with people coming out of addiction and complex trauma, probably 25 of the people I deal with have got what we call spiritual abuse. And that is that someplace in their life, they were made to feel that was not safe. was a dangerous . And that people who represented Him weren't safe either. And that is a huge issue for some people that is very hard to get over because of some of the stuff that they get told. I said I wanted to talk about some of the common distortions that people have. last week we talked about, we talked about 's anger and a lot of the distortions that have really messed up a lot of people and said, I don't want any relationship with this . Tonight I want to talk about maybe one of the hardest to explain things and I hope I can do a decent job. I'm going to illustrate it next week just that hopefully it just helps it make sense a little bit better. But it's, if you go to churches, you don't have to go very long. You don't have to go very long before you hear 's in control. ? And then you hear 's King, 's sovereign. And that phrase gets thrown around a lot within the world. But what concerns me is that there's been a lot of sloppy thinking about that. And it has turned a lot of people off of . let me explain some of that sloppy thinking. the first one is this. I had people come to me, clients, and say, if 's in control, why didn't he stop my uncle from sexually abusing me? If he loves me he says he does and he's king and he's sovereign in control, he could have stopped it. the fact that he didn't stop it, he's either an unloving or he really isn't in control. And they then go, I don't want a that was in control. Supposedly, and didn't stop bad things from happening. And then they hear it through the ears that go, are you saying to me that it was 's will that I got sexually abused? Are you saying to me that it's 's will that these children in war-torn countries get slaughtered in a genocide? How can that be 's will? you can begin to realize that if you stop and think about is in control, all of a sudden you go, whoa, what does that really mean? Because if it means what some people are saying it means, then I don't want anything to do with that kind of a . And then some people say, 's in control, I'm just going to sit on my couch and wait for somebody to phone me and offer me a job. It's I can be either a puppet on a string or I don't have to do anything will do every single day. I can do everything for me. that's another area of sloppy thinking. I want to try to help you think about that. And again, it's one of those topics in the that we are given some answers to, but there's still an element that we can't quite get our brains around. There's still a mystery element to it. that's what I want you to understand up front is even after I'm done explaining, if I do a perfect job, there's still a part of you that's going to say my brain hurts because I can't quite get that figured out. , let me tackle this whole topic. When we talk about being in control and whether we have free will or not, let me give it to you this way. If was creating us and wanted a relationship with us, do you realize that could have said, I know how to get them all to love me and do what I want and to spend time with me? I'll make them robots. I will give them no free will. I will program them to show me love and to show me kindness. But do you realize that when a robot shows you loving actions, it doesn't feel loving because it's a robot. love only is meaningful if it comes from . If it comes from free will, where it comes from a place where I could love a whole bunch of other things, but I choose to love you. the only way that a meaningful relationship with could happen is if he gave us free will and a whole bunch of options of other things we could love. And then in that environment, we looked at all those options and say, you're more beautiful than all of them. I choose you. Then that is meaningful love. , now think about that in the terms of complex trauma or gang activity. I ask clients this all the time. What is the best way to get your child to obey you? Scare them to death. Put the fear of in them. Make them afraid to disobey you. Do you realize that fear of disaster is the best motivator to get people to do what you want? That's what happens in the gang fight. That's what happens in the gang world. That's what happens in the street level world. Is people obey the gang leader because they're afraid of not obeying the gang leader. it's obedience based on fear. It's love, what looks love based on fear. But do you realize that's not true love? what I say to clients all the time, the best way to motivate children in the long run is not fear. Because after a while, they'll rebel if you use fear. The best way in the long run is to just love them. And you go, that's no guarantee they're going to obey me away. But once they know they're fully loved and they live within that love, then they want to obey you. Not to earn, not to avoid getting punished, but to give back the overflow of the love that you've poured into them. love becomes the basis to produce love in somebody else that you give free will for. Fear does not produce genuine love in somebody else. And said, I'm going to create a world where love will be the most important thing. Now let me take that a little bit further. Do you realize that the greatest pleasure in life comes from a love connection? The problem with complex trauma is you didn't get that growing up. you've never experienced the highest pleasure that is humanly possible to enjoy. that's why drugs and alcohol become attractive because they give a pleasure that is close to that, but not quite as great as that. And you just keep going back to that because it makes you get all of the feelings that love was supposed to get and connection was supposed to get. And what is saying is, I want to create a universe where love is the dominant thing, because then as people connect with each other and with me in deep, honest intimacy and love, they will enjoy the highest pleasure possible. I want people to have my happiness, my joy, is what he is saying. And to do that, I have to give them free will. , you follow all that far, I hope. then it goes further. How does act as the king of a universe, of a galaxy, of this whole big thing that we call our planet Earth? rules by what we call a first cause, primary cause, or secondary cause. a primary cause is when does something directly. he created directly, ? He turned water into wine directly. He was actively involved in the immediate behavior which produced the immediate result, ? That's the first cause. created the world, and he's following some big plan that we don't fully understand, but that's the first primary cause. Secondary cause is within the world, gave two other forces. Number one, us, with free will. you can go home and smack your kid. Nobody can stop you, ? And then the second type of secondary cause is natural laws. Gravity is there. The weather, all of the different tides and currents in the ocean are all part of that. Bacteria and viruses, they create all kinds of things. they are things that cause other things. now just stick with me and I'll explain it. let's say a person is on a roof and they slip and they fall, and they fall down. And they fall 20 stories and they fall to their death. Now do you say did that? No, was not the primary cause of that person slipping. Gravity did that. And we acknowledge that there's a secondary cause in the world that initially put in place, but 's not walking around saying, if you slip, I'll catch you and I'll overcome gravity. He lets the secondary cause happen. somebody sneezes on you and you get sick. Did make you sick? No, a virus made you sick. that is kind of how all of that happens. Now let me take it a little bit further. What did when he created the world and put all these secondary causes in place is he says, I acted as a primary cause to create this. Now I will sit on my hands and let these other causes secondary causes carry on. , I'm not going to stop global warming. I'm not going to stop glaciers melting. I'm not going to stop hurricanes from happening. All of that is going to happen as people make decisions, as weather follows its patterns. I'm going to let all of that happen. I will not interfere with the secondary causes that I have put into place. , now let me just take a little side note here. How many of you have gone looking for a parking spot downtown and you say, please give me a parking spot and you go around and there's a parking spot and you go, it's a miracle. It's not a miracle. Somebody just moved out. A miracle by definition is when interferes with the secondary causes and interrupts them. he turns white. he turns water into wine. That would not happen by the secondary causes. It only would happen if reasserted a primary cause force in the world. , a lot of the things that we call miracles are just the result of secondary causes. They're not technically miracles. , that's my little rant for that. , let me take that further and this is where it gets painful. , said, I will put secondary forces. I will sit on my hands and not interfere. people can abuse this world and there will be droughts and there will be hurricanes and global warming and all of that, I will not interfere. You'll get a Hitler and he's going to come along and he's going to want to rule the world. I'm not going to interfere. Even though six million Jews and all kinds of other people are going to get killed, I will not interfere. A father's going to sexually abuse his daughter. I will not interfere. I will let that happen and the consequences of that happen. Because you see, if said, I will interfere every time something bad is about to happen, then he takes away free will. And then he takes away the consequences and he becomes codependent. And he says, you can do all the bad you want. I just won't let any bad things happen. says, no, in order for this to work, I have to sit on my hands and not interfere with the secondary causes. Now, it doesn't stop there. Because if it stopped there, you'd go, that is, I don't that. You want to know what said? Is, what? I'm not going to wait for you to love me. I created the world. I created secondary causes. I made it possible for people to use their human words, their human will, in a harmful way and hurt other people. And I'm not going to interfere. But here's what I'll do. I will come and I will come on this planet as a human being. I will love you and come beside you. I will experience all the secondary causes and the abuse that they have. I will go through illegal trial. I will go through torture. I will go through every pain at a deeper level than anybody else has ever experienced. I will go through it all out of love for you. And then when you go through it, I will come beside you and say, I get your pain. And I will be able to comfort you and help you in your pain. you will experience my love, not from a distant , but from a who's gone through the same things you did, who understands, who cares, and who comforts you there. But then it doesn't stop there. He then says, I will take that bad that person did. And in a way you'll never be able to understand. I will somehow bring a positive out of it. And that's Romans 8, 28, where says, I will take everything that happens to those who love me, everything good, everything ugly, everything wrong and bad, and I will turn it into a positive thing in their life to make them a better person if they cooperate with me. I will not let that negative stuff that other people perpetrated on you, I will not let it keep you in a place of negative. If you surrender to me, I will turn it into a growth thing and into a positive. And that's the story that I want to tell you next week. But what I want you to hear tonight is this. How does rule the world? Not through coercive force, but through love. And it's not just love from a distance and say love me, love me a narcissist. No, it's saying, let me first love you greater than you ever will be able to love me. And let me do that by making the greatest sacrifice imaginable from moving from being infinite to a human being. what that would be ? That would be you one day saying, I think I'm going to spend the rest of my life as a mosquito because I want to help these mosquitoes. They are vicious creatures, especially in Manitoba. And they need a lot of work on them to become nicer creatures. the only way I can do that is to become a mosquito myself. You can sign up over there if you're interested. You're going, what? There's not a hope I'm going to be a mosquito. But said, I'm going to become a human. And for the first time in my life, I'm not going to stay up forever. I got to have a sleep. For the first time, I got to eat, and I'm going to get hungry, and I'm going to get tired. Boy, that's going to be hard being that little wee human being. And I can only run about 10 miles an hour, and I can only walk many miles a day. And I can only talk to one person at a time. And when I was a in , I could talk to everybody all at once. It was not a problem. Wow, that's a restriction and a limitation that is super hard. But I'm not going to stop there. I'm going to go through every single type of hurt and pain that they've gone through. I'll get abandoned. I'll get rejected. I'll get forgotten about. I'll get abused. I will get injustice. I'll go through it all at the worst possible level because now I understand their pain. And now when they're in pain, I can meet them not out of coercive force but of love. And that is how rules the world.