Welcome to another Friday night. I want to take a common topic and just go a bit deeper on it today in our reparenting series and it's self-care. And self-care is a topic that has become very popular for people to talk about but I find that for much of the discussion that I see that takes place around self-care is that a lot of people end up only doing what I would call partial self-care. They're taking care of parts of themselves but not all of themselves. Secondly, I find that a lot of people they just know they're tired but they don't know why. They just know I need some self-care but they don't know what's caused them to become depleted. there's a lack of awareness about what the people are doing. They don't know what's going on. They don't know what they're doing. And what people then do is, oh I'm tired I just need to rest physically. And that might not be exactly what they need. They might need a self-care that goes beyond just physical rest. And I really want to dig into this because what I find is for a lot of people they see some of the current teaching that might kind of just be that more superficial you just need to go have a day at the spa. And they just think that's going to fix all their problems. And they don't have a full enough understanding of what true self-care is. And they don't understand at a conscious level all the things that bring about us feeling depleted. And I want to really dig into both of those today. I think for anybody in recovery they know that when they're depleted, of energy, it's a dangerous time for them. if they're depleted physically, they're exhausted, or they're depleted emotionally, or they're depleted in their relational gas tanks, that's a dangerous time for a person in recovery. And it's important to begin to understand when we're depleted and what's caused that depletion. We need a growing self-awareness in this area if we're going to do in recovery. That's what we're going to really dig into. What happens I think for many people in recovery which complicates this is they go into recovery after years of basically dissociating. they've suppressed all their emotions, they've lived robots, they just do what needs to be done, they don't feel much, they're not aware of what's going on inside of them. It's just all about productivity and doing stuff and lack of self-awareness. Everything is just operating of this self-conscious world. And they're disconnected from emotions, even from bodily sensations, they just push themselves through life. What they don't realize is as they're going through life all of that stuff they're not conscious of it but their brain is subconscious brain is conscious of it. And their subconscious brain is going too much stress, here too much anxiety, too much depression, too much tiredness to. I'm running out of gas, I'm running out of gas, I better go to fight flight or freeze. And their subconscious brain is starting to think of fight flight freeze and the person's not even conscious that's what their subconscious brain is planning. And , all of a sudden they find themselves sliding back into old behaviors. Now they're eating too much, they're sleeping too much they're avoiding things they're procrastinating and it's just starting to happen and they don't know why because they've been disconnected from all of that and if they keep giving into that and letting those old behaviors continue pretty soon they're going to be an even darker place pretty soon they're going to be even more depleted and it's super dangerous for them but then what happens to many people when they finally clue in i'm overeating again and i'm doing all of my old behaviors here what's going on oh i must be depleted all i need is a day at the spa that'll fix everything i just need self-care and they go for a day at the spa and it doesn't help a whole lot it helps a little but it doesn't help a whole lot it helps a little bit but it doesn't help a whole lot it helps a little bit but it doesn't help a whole lot that's what i want us to understand we need self-awareness around when we're depleted the things that deplete us but we also need self-awareness around am i meeting consistently my 12 needs because if i'm not i'm going to become depleted those are crucial let me let me let me develop what depletes us and there's been some amazing research done around this that i find quite fascinating and i'm going to share it with you we all most readily think of being depleted tired or exhausted because of physical labor because of physical work about doing too much i'm just exhausted when we think of depletion we tend to think of it in four ways and we think of it in four ways and we think of it in four ways and we think of it in physical activity terms let me develop that and it's partly but there's a whole bunch more things other than physical that deplete us and that's where we're going to get to but let me give you a bigger context here any time we've got our sympathetic nervous system which is our activity and our parasympathetic nervous system which is our rest they need to be in balance if we are going to keep our gas tanks full to stay healthy not burnout if my sympathetic nervous system is going too much and my parasympathetic nervous system is not allowed to bring in rest and healing and rejuvenation i eventually am going to become depleted and for people from complex trauma this is why we become depleted and depleted easily because we're used to being in our sympathetic nervous system all the time because we're in survival mode and it's easy to slide back into that's been the default setting for years and big picture what we're looking at with depletion is learning when i'm in my sympathetic nervous system when i'm back in survival modes type of stuff and not in my parasympathetic in the balance that is the big picture of what we're looking at now let me just say this when we go into our sympathetic nervous system it actually for many people feels good because we get an adrenaline rush we get more energy we feel more alive we don't feel depleted and we go this is a good thing but what you don't realize is if you don't get to the parasympathetic in the balance being in your sympathetic nervous system you're not going to be in the balance if you're in a parasympathetic too much feels good for now but it's slowly taking its toll and using up gas that you're not replenishing and pretty soon you're going to burn out you're going to be depleted let me give you some of the physical things that they're finding besides just overworking over go go all the time not getting enough sleep what they're finding is a person who loves multitasking and they're always wanting to multitask that takes a lot of energy and it can deplete us more quickly than a person who just does one thing at a time another thing they're finding is people that live in cluttered messy spaces without realizing that's actually depleting them that's taking energy out of them just to live in that space another one is being cooped up inside all alone you don't go out you don't connect you don't interact with people you don't do anything social you just stay cooped up that takes a lot of energy other ones not drinking enough water dehydration another one people who live with chronic physical pain just living with pain take a ton of energy those people get depleted people that are fighting a sickness an infection a virus get depleted because it takes a lot of energy to fight those things people recovering from surgery where their bodies doing a ton of healing physically are very tired and then people who go through a major move or a major change in life job wise moving to a different city a new relationship a child moving away from home a new baby ton of energy required and they can become very depleted because of that those are all physical things but what i want you to realize is that's only a small part of what depletes us one of the things that depletes us probably more than anything is emotions let's talk about that because for people from complex trauma who've suppressed emotions disconnected from emotions they don't realize how much energy emotions take and what we find for many people who take our lift program or react program is after a couple weeks they're just exhausted and they go why i haven't been doing anything and they're still thinking in terms of physical activity is the only thing that makes you tired and i go you're doing human's work when it comes to emotions now and you're exhausted because of all the emotional work that you're doing and that's a new concept for them things that deplete us in the emotional world and it's fascinating to me what they're finding out is when you have a physical activity and you're tired and you're exhausted and you're exhausted and you're you have stuff emotions all the time you've got anger coming up you stuff it down you've got fear coming up you stuff it down that's intense emotional stuff that you're stuffing if you go through loss and you stuff it down it's holding a beach ball underwater it takes a lot of energy to stuff down an intense emotion and you get depleted because of that second one with that is every time you feel an intense emotion anger deep fear huge amount of stress hate deep sense of injustice those are intense emotions and they all involve cortisol any intense emotions that brings about cortisol you will be exhausted afterwards they take a ton of energy to do that you're not going to be exhausted you're not going to be exhausted you're not going to be exhausted and you're not going to be exhausted and that's the key to this and that's the key to this is that you have to have a lot of energy just feeling and expressing very intense emotions requires a lot of energy next one i've already kind of referred to and it's processing old wounds old trauma that you've been suppressing for years but now you're bringing it out and talking about it processing it crying about it healing feeling the emotions of it that's exhausting that is hard work and it is very depleting if you're in a recovery program expect to be tired another one is if you're carrying an intense resentment towards somebody that takes a lot of energy another one if you have a conflict an intense conflict with somebody you can expect you're going to be exhausted afterwards because that intense conflict took a ton of energy next one if you're sitting in an intense emotion that can't quickly be resolved you've just lost somebody you're grieving you just don't magically make that go away you got to sit in it or if you're going through a time of change you're going to be going to a new job going through a move there's a lot of anxiety and insecurity around that living in the unknown that creates emotions you can't magically make it go away you got to sit in them sitting in those emotions takes a lot out of you if you're in a dangerous place you're there's a war going on you're sitting in intense emotions that you can't magically make disappear if you've got financial problems you can't just make disappear those take a lot out of you the emotions that you have to sit in another important one is when you are supporting somebody who's going through a very painful time you're listening to them you're feeling compassion to them you're spending time with them you're going to be exhausted compassion fatigue is going to be there another one is if you get triggered an old wound an old issue gets triggered you feel disrespected you feel hurt you feel disrespected you feel not heard not seen rejected all of that and you lash out you lose it you just fly off the handle and you go on a rampage in your triggered dysregulated state you're going to be exhausted afterwards it giving in to that trigger and going to your limbic brain and just fueling letting it fuel a whole bunch of behaviors takes a lot of energy another one they're finding is if you are constantly just negative in a negative place in your head criticizing everything being negative about everything complaining about everything in your life it takes a lot of energy it depletes you and part of that is because you're not giving your brain the good chemicals it needs the serotonin the dopamine the oxytocin that it needs to feel good to get energy you're depriving it of that by just focusing on negative all the time and it depletes you if you become involved in a cause a very important cause let's say climate related racial related equality of the sexes related injustice at work whatever if you become a in a cause that is passionate to you it's going to stir up a lot of intense emotions and that can be very draining especially if you then spend time on social media on the internet researching the cause listening to what other people say about the cause it keeps stirring up intense emotions and that can be very draining if you are a perfectionist or if you are a bit of a control freak you just always want to control everything in everybody's life that takes a lot of emotional energy it takes a lot of energy and there's going to be a depletion that can come out of that now let me take this a little bit further in the deeper complex trauma territory most people that come out of complex trauma have what i call a default setting it's where their brain naturally just has become used to and is their normal that could be fear that could be shame that could be feeling guilt all of those just that's the way they've lived all their childhood is feeling those emotions and now that's just their normal their default setting if you have a default setting of shame i'm not good enough my life sucks i'm not valuable i'm not lovable that's going to result in a default setting where you're always seeking validation maybe or approval from others that's draining what i want you to see is certain default settings take a lot of energy some of the other default settings is always worrying about what people think an insecurity what do they think of the what do they think of my hair what do they think of my looks what do they think of how i just performed it takes a lot of energy if you have a false guilt that's always been your default setting you need to feel guilty to feel normal that takes a lot of energy if you've always had an anger and you need to feel angry to feel normal that takes a lot of energy if you've got anxiety or negativity that we talk about that takes a lot of energy if that's your default setting and your brain's just naturally keeps gravitating back to wanting to feel negative and anxious some are always living by should say unrealistic expectations for themselves i should be doing this i should be doing that takes a lot of energy if that's your default setting perfectionism controlling we've talked about if you are a person that your default setting is stuffing emotions that's the first thing you do when you feel an emotion is want to stuff it and be stoic that takes a lot of energy if you have a default setting that doesn't want to feel emotions you just have distractions all the time that takes a lot of energy what i want you to see is when you look at the 60 characteristics of complex trauma that we talk about a lot of those 60 characteristics can become a default setting for people from complex trauma and most of those characteristics if you think about it you realize whoa it takes a lot of energy to have that is my normal it's important to begin to realize that people coming out of complex trauma they have come to a place as their default setting that constantly is depleting important to understand that's just the emotional let's go to the third the pleading category and that's the intellectual what they've realized happens when we enter a bigbrahimani society it becomes our tang is again we have our conscious brain and our subconscious brain our subconscious brain is working 95 of the time we're just in autopilot we're just doing all kinds of different things we're not even aware of that doesn't take tons of energy it's our conscious brain and that's the intense cognitive processing reading thinking analyzing problem solving doing calculations memorizing explaining stuff to people where we ought to be in our conscious brain that takes a lot of energy in fact it takes about a third of our calories our inner conscious brain and if you're in a day where you're just doing a lot of intense thinking processing calculating teaching and you're using a lot of calories and that takes a lot of energy and that's whatent Muchas gracias you're doing a lot of talking you're doing a lot of learning you're doing a lot of Forever and growing and building utibilidad and building confidence and building patience analyzing skills and building awareness and building confidence you're going to be tired afterwards. Another intellectual depleting thing is obsessing. Not being able to turn your brain off when you have a resentment or there's been an injustice or you are worried about something or involved in a new cause or you have an embarrassment that you just keep replaying in your mind or a new love in your life that you just become obsessed about and you go over and over and over in your mind. That can be very draining. And it's people that don't have good intellectual internal boundaries that can stop thinking about things when it's time to stop thinking about them. There's a fourth area where depletion happens and that's relationship stuff. let me give you those. if you're involved in a relationship and there's been a series of choices that have now involved in conflict, you're going to be depleted after all of that. If you're coming out of a shame place where you're always trying to impress others, what are they thinking about me? And now you're wearing masks, you're switching and becoming what they want to be. That takes a lot of energy. If you're always telling lies, and got to keep track of what lies you've been telling people, that takes a lot of energy. If you're always fawning and people-pleasing and giving what they want, that takes a lot of energy. If you're constantly needing to be attuned to what everybody's feeling that you can respond, that takes a lot of energy. And what they have found is people in relationships who are basically fawning takes a lot of energy. If you are in a relationship and you have a child or a partner that's behaving badly, let's say you're out in public and your child's crying and having a tantrum, or you're with friends and your partner's being inappropriate, and you're trying to keep a smile on your face and act it's not bothering you, you're suppressing all of that anger, embarrassment, that's a significant amount of energy. And you're trying to keep a smile on your face, and act it's not bothering you, and that's a significant amount of energy being used to suppress all of that. Another one that's really important to understand is if you are a very prejudiced individual, let's say that certain races of people you just look down on, you don't, you have somebody that moves into your neighborhood who's a different race than you, or you move to a different city where there's a lot more of those people, all of a sudden now, you've got this internal stuff going on of frustration and anger all the time due to your racism, due to your prejudice, and that takes a lot of energy. I've already referred to it, but it's important to highlight again, people that are alone too much, who aren't experiencing secure attachment, aren't experiencing healthy relationship, they're going to be depleted. Flip side of that, people who fall in love. all of a sudden I'm in love, and now initially it seems to energize you, you've got all kinds of energy, you want to do all kinds of things, you're fueled by oxytocin and adrenaline and dopamine, and it feels great, but it's taking a lot of energy out of you, and it's going to take its toll. The next one is if you're in social settings where you're kind of the leader, where you're kind of the host, you have to be on your game, you have to be talking to everybody and making sure you've been in contact with everybody and everybody's , that takes a ton of energy. Or if you're in a social setting but you're an introvert, and you have to kind of force yourself to talk to people and talk small talk and talk about stuff that doesn't really interest you, that can take a ton of energy too, and it can be very depleting. Another one is if you lose somebody close to you. again, it's the end of a relationship, could be death, could be divorce, separation, but it's grief, and you're going through those very intense emotions. Another one is just constant conflict with a child and the family. The child just is rebelling, the child just is defiant, the child is disrespectful, the child is always making bad decisions, doing things, that can really take its toll on you and be very depleting. those are kind of the different areas that bring about depletion. important to become aware of those in your own life. Let me take you to the next level of self-awareness around this depletion, and that is what are some of the indicators that I am depleted, or I'm getting close to, being depleted. either my gas tank is almost empty or it is empty. It's interesting that they have found that people that are depleted aren't able to grip things and hold them for as long as they normally would if they're feeling energetic, if they have lots of resources and their gas tanks are full. maintaining grip on something is reduced. That's very interesting. That's a very interesting indicator. But some of the ones that you can be more practically in touch with would be people that are depleted often start to deviate in their diet. They're not eating as . They're not eating as good of food. They're binging, they're snacking more, or they're not eating as much as they should. those around food can be indicators. Often people that are depleted become impulsive in spending money. And it's their brain looking for pleasure, their brain looking for an escape. But they start to find themselves wanting to make impulsive spending decisions. People who are depleted usually are more irritable. And they begin to react aggressively in situations that really don't call for it. the slightest little provocation and they overreact to that. that's a very important indicator, that irritability overreaction. People who are depleted often, their cognitive abilities aren't as sharp. Their brain is slow, their brain is fuzzy. They have trouble with cognitive tasks, trouble with decision making. it starts to affect their ability to think properly. Often when people are depleted, they begin to lose motivation. they notice their motivation is lacking. It's not what it should be or normally is. People who are depleted find that when they're with people, they just don't want to put the energy into being present. It's when the person's talking, it's, oh, I wish they would shut up. Because I just don't want to sit and listen. there's a resistance now to wanting to be present. To other people. People are depleted, their parasympathetic nervous system starts to want to forcibly kick in. And sometimes it does that through, they start to get depression happening. Because they're running out of gas in their gas tank. depression starts to happen. Or with that, they start to get anxiety for no apparent reason. They're just all over the place. They're just, all of a sudden they wake up and they're feeling anxious and they don't know why. It could be they're just depleted. Or some, there starts to be an emotional roller coaster. they feel really great and then one little thing happens and they just feel terrible. They feel depressed. And it's , whoa, where's my emotional stability? I'm all over the map emotionally in a given day. Others with that, they can be sitting watching TV and all of a sudden there's a commercial that comes on and they find themselves crying. And they go, whoa, that's not how I normally am. What's going on here? And they're just emotionally more vulnerable. It could be from emotional depletion. And then others, all of a sudden they realize their bubble, their boundaries bubble has grown. They just don't want people around, don't want people in the same room as them, even in the same room and they don't want to be in the same house with them. their bubble just changes. That can be a sign of depletion as . again, be aware of your signs when you're emotionally depleted is important because once you see that warning sign, you can stop and go, what's going on here? Why am I more irritable today? Why do I not want to be present today? Oh, I'm depleted. Why am I depleted? That becomes the process you go through. But there's another level of self-awareness here and that is to be aware of your old tendencies that you naturally fall into when you are depleted. And these often you fell into subconsciously. You weren't even aware that you were falling into it because you weren't even aware you're depleted. This all happened and patterns develop subconsciously that weren't healthy. And it's becoming aware of those things. for many people, what happened when they were depleted, they just dissociated. They just checked out. They weren't present to themselves. They weren't present to anybody. They went into a fantasy world. They just went into some internal zombie land. It's important to understand that because what happens for many people in recovery is that's what they think self-care is. When it gets too much, you just check out. And their self-care always is a check out type of thing, a dissociative type of thing, which isn't necessarily healthy self-care at all. Others, when they were depleted, they automatically began to overindulge in something pleasurable. food, sex, TV, playing a game, video game. all of a sudden it was just, let's overindulge in this pleasurable activity. That was their way of self-care, which again, having some of that with good boundaries can be healthy. But for most people with complex trauma, that went into unhealthy territory. For others, what happened to them, their tendencies when they're depleted is, oh, I need connection. But their brain doesn't go, I need healthy connection. Their brain goes, I need sex. I just need sex. That's what I'm needing now. their brain has over years of getting the wires crossed about what, how to meet their needs. my need is connection. Their brain has begun to think my need is actually sex. Or my need is truly, I need emotional empathy and nurture. But their brain, it goes, I need food. Because grandma always said, here's a cookie, that'll make you feel better. And they've been mistrained as to what their need is and how to meet that need. Some people, once they feel they need self-care because of depletion, their brain always goes to something that is a junk food thing. Let's go get drunk. Let's just eat junk food. Let's just do something that they know is unhealthy. But that's what their brain just sees as self-care. Let's break the rules. Let's just self-indulge. be aware of that. Some, they weren't allowed self-care as a kid. They were told they were being lazy or selfish if they relaxed. And now when they start to get depleted and they feel the need for self-care, they go, I just need to go and help somebody. I just need to be busy and take on a project. That's where their brain goes. Others, when they are feeling depleted, they just go to distractions. I'm just going to stay busy. I'm going to organize. I'm going to do stuff I don't feel. And that's been their way of coping. Others, I just need instant gratification. And I'm going to go shopping and their whole focus becomes I just need to feel good now. And instant gratification becomes their idea of self-care. Some, they go into a victim mentality when they're depleted. Poor me. My life sucks. They feel sorry for themselves. They tell everybody about how hard their life is, about how tired they are. That's what they think is the solution. And that can actually feed something very, very unhealthy. Some, when they start to feel depleted, they go to avoid procrastinating. That's what their brain thinks is self-care. Just start avoiding everything, procrastinating on everything. Some people, when they're feeling depleted, they go, I'm in a crisis. I'm going to go to a professional and get the professional to magically fix me. That's what they think is the answer to being depleted. Some, when they're depleted, they've learned, I'll just go get my friends to do stuff for me. And they start to use their depletion as a way to get attention and manipulate people to do stuff for them that they should be doing for themselves. And it's only crisis management stuff that's not really taking care of the deep needs properly. Other people, when they're depleted, they're not really taking care of their needs properly. They're not really taking care of their needs properly. They just go, I need to medicate myself. I need help to relax. And they self-medicate. Others, their solution when they're depleted is, people are too much, I just need to isolate and withdraw from people and not connect to anybody because that takes too much energy. All of those might make you feel better for a minute in your limbic brain, but they make the difference. They make things worse in the long run. That's what I want you to see. be aware of your unhealthy self-care tools, your unhealthy patterns for when you're depleted. And most of those have happened at a subconscious level. let's go to healthy self-care. And what I want you to realize that there's two levels of healthy self-care. There's that in the moment when I am depleted and I realize it. What do I need to do now to take care of myself, to get some energy? you're basically kind of in a crisis mode or on the verge of crisis and you're needing to fix some things now. that's one level of self-care. But I hope you're seeing there's a deeper level of self-care. That is, I need to meet all 12 of my needs on a regular basis. In a, I don't learn to do that, I'm going to keep cycling back to crisis stuff where I'm depleted over and over and over again. But if I learn to meet all 12 of my needs on a regular basis, then I won't get depleted. that's the better self-care that we're wanting to learn. learn to meet your 12 needs. And that means growing in mindfulness. That means learning to detect when a need is not being met. again, we've done talks on this that hopefully you can go through and that will help you learn how to do this. But that's what self-care really is, is I am learning to take care of myself, not just my physical needs, but my emotional needs, my intellectual needs, my relational needs, spiritual needs. All of those needs, I am learning to meet consistently. And I am learning how to detect when those needs aren't being met. important. And you might need to ask somebody to help you as you figure out how to do that. Secondly, self-care always will involve an element of connection with myself and with at least one other person at a deep, caring, vulnerable level. That is such an important piece of self-care. don't lose sight of that. Self-care, there's an element you can do all by yourself. Do it alone, but there's an element of connection that is always going to be needed because that is one of our needs. Next, part of self-care, especially the crisis stuff, when I am depleted, is I need to learn emotional regulation. I need to learn how to manage all of the stuff that's coming up because I am depleted. I'm irritable. I need to be able to manage that. I'm feeling some discontent. I need to learn how to sit in that. I'm feeling some anxiety and depression. I need to learn how to manage that. there's always going to be elements of self-regulation and learning healthy self-soothing that are part of self-care. Let me take it a wee bit deeper. To be able to take care of yourself in a healthy way means I need to put a higher priority on my own pleasure and enjoyment. Now to some people that immediately sounds wrong. That I am being proud, that I am being selfish, that I am being a narcissist. Not if it's healthy. Do you realize that you can't love others from an empty cup? if you're not filling your own gas tanks, your own cup, you're never going to be able to love others properly. life is loving others but also to love others I have to love myself. And for many people from complex trauma they have to place their needs on a higher priority than they've been placing them. And that's definitely going to feel wrong but it's important. The next thing is part of self-care and media life is to be able to meet my needs. And self-care is meeting my needs is meeting my needs with things that my needs need. I have to figure out my and dislikes. I have to feel out what feeds my soul, what causes me enjoyment. hobbies, things that I can do that just are fulfilling for me. I need to figure out those things. Self-care has to have self-compassion. I need to think through myself. I need to stay depleted. somebody has said it's the golden rule in reverse. Do to yourself as you would do to others. you're great at taking care of everybody else now treat yourself the same way. That is an important part. Become aware of that internal self-directed anger at yourself that can be damaging that can come out of shame that inner critic that's always criticizing you false guilt true guilt but many people just have this constantly directed anger at themselves become aware of that and then develop rather than that internal critic that's always finding fault and putting you down and saying harsh things to you and judging you find a loving internal voice it's still firm it's still your cortex it's a good parent that's pointing out things but it's a loving compassionate internal voice and then allow yourself to be human we have limitations we can't do everything we can't go without sleep without food we can't go 24 7 we need breaks we're human and part of self-care is learning to accept you my humanness next one in self-care is don't let your limbic brain be your only guide you need to listen to your limbic brain go oh I am just feeling irritable who I am just feeling anxiety and depression I need to listen to that and go what's going on but what my limbic brain then wants to do is if I just listen to my limbic brain oh I'm feeling irritable tired I just need to sit do nothing all day today my limbic brain can identify that something's not but often the solutions that the limbic brain then provides can be dangerous sitting all day and doing nothing that could be terrible it might only meet one need physical rest I need to meet all 12 needs I could be lacking in 10 other areas now and sitting all day is not going to meet those other 10 areas and just listening to my limbic brain solution is not always wise all that the limbic brain is aware of is what it's feeling most intensely it's not necessarily aware of what is happening underneath that and I need to get to my cortex and this is important when I am feeling depleted my limbic brain is triggered and I can't get over it if I don't do it I can't do it and I'm going to have to move around a little bit but I'm going to be careful and I'm going to have to move around a little bit but I'm going to have to move around a And I need to pay attention to that, but then I need to get to my core text and I need to begin to investigate without judgment, with curiosity, and ask myself some questions. What needs haven't been met lately? What's been going on in my life that maybe is causing greater stress, greater anger? What's been happening? What would help meet my needs now? What should I change? What should I do that's going to help to meet those needs? Have I been neglecting in my life any of the things that I had built into my life that were important for keeping me in a healthy place, that were meeting all of the needs? what happens to a lot of people is when they're in crisis, they go, I need to start getting up every morning and having time just to do yoga, to meditate, to just be quiet and check in with myself and be mindful. And they set up a routine and it begins to really start to change. And then they're in a state of mind that's , oh, I'm feeling good. I don't need to do that stuff anymore. And pretty soon they're depleted again. And what you need to be able to go do is say, have I been neglecting any of the activities that once were very important in my recovery? Things that were feeding my soul and meeting my needs. And then that mindfulness, where is my stress level at? Where is my anxiety? Where is my anxiety? Where is my stress level at? Where is my anger at? Where is my fatigue at? Where is my anxiety at? Where is my depression at? Why that's important is because for many people with complex trauma, I'm not aware of depression or anxiety or stress until it hits a 10 out of 10. I need to stop and maybe it's only at a four, but whoa, why is it at a four when it's usually at a two? I need to be able to become aware of the more subtle. Emotions when they're not at that intense point. let me end by saying this, this part of self-awareness and doing that self inventory and figuring out what's going on for many people, they need to stop for a half an hour and be really quiet and get centered and grounded. And then they need to be connected and connected to their body and connected to their emotions before they can ask those questions. If I was to go to some people that are depleted and go, where's your stress level at? Oh, I haven't been stressed. Oh, where's your depression? Oh, no, I'm not depressed. In their mind, they aren't because they haven't connected yet. They're still in a disconnected place and they're talking from a disconnected place. It's not feeling those things. they don't think they have those things. And get yourself to a place where you can be quiet for a period of time away from distractions and truly connect. And as you do that, then you're able to do that inventory. this becoming depleted, what depletes me? What are the signs I am depleted? I think this is such an important part for many, many people coming out of complex trauma to become aware of. And then what do I need to do when I am depleted to get myself back on track? What do I need to do on a daily basis I don't keep sliding into getting depleted? Such important tools to learn. I hope this has been helpful as we head into a new year. That it will just help you on your journey.