welcome to another Friday night. I want to do another talk on the prisons that come out of complex trauma and I want to look at one tonight that's not going to apply to everybody but I think you might be surprised at how many people it does apply to and it's people that engage in criminal behavior and I'm not talking necessarily about hardened criminals I'm talking about some good people that still engage in some criminal behavior and the purpose of this talk is not to be judgmental it's not to go on a rant or moralistic crusade about all of that stuff it's it's really to understand that what the research is showing is that people that end up in continuing criminal behavior over 90 percent have complex trauma and the criminal behavior was not the only one that was involved in the criminal behavior. It was the people that were involved in the criminal behavior that were involved in the criminal behavior. And the criminal behavior was not the only one that was involved in the criminal behavior. And the actually a way to cope with the deep emptiness and pain inside it was a way to try to get some needs met and it became a pattern of behavior that was designed to help them survive but they didn't realize it was a maladaptive behavior they didn't realize that it was going to start causing them trouble and what happens for many people is that they do this criminal behavior and then they get caught and then they stop but they don't realize that they're going to get caught and then they stop but they don't realize that they're going to get caught but some even though they say but some even though they say I'm never going to do this again this was terrible getting caught something in them keeps them going back and pretty soon they find that it's a prison to them they can't seem to escape it they part of them wants to escape but part of them keeps being drawn back to it and what we know is that the rate of recidivism or re-offending or going back to criminal behavior technically is 30 to 50 percent and that's the way it is. and what we know is that the rate of recidivism or re-offending or going back to criminal behavior technically is 30 to 50 percent and most countries but it's probably a lot higher we just don't have the statistics for it and there's a definite element that this form of behavior has become a problem it's become a prison it keeps trapping them and taking them back to places that they don't want to go and I really want today to be about understanding what this is about not about judgment but about understanding how this can be done and how we can come out of complex trauma. and to begin with let me just talk about different types of criminal behavior I would say probably the most common one that I have dealt with clients is boosting or stealing people who steal food clothes small items all the way up to car theft, but small item boosting for many is a very common behavior that they get. It comes to the high Spirit and we have height, age, ethnicity, personality and the difference betweenned. What makes proszęhh the success in chasing criminals and counters? then I just wanted to end here by giving a little bit of an example around crime and Alright probably if you for заap medications prepared plenty of seniors and resources that can treat it but it's very bound to some, this excuseacy comes from the fact that there might be a majority that's not necessarily a ban on ne' s insurance. common behavior that they just get drawn back into over and over again. Then there's the drug dealer that we easily think of, people that get involved in gangs and organized crime, but then robbery, scamming, the con man, the hustler, then people that just, I'm going to go turn a trick and that way I'm going to get some easy money. Then there's pimping and human trafficking, and then vandalism, crimes against property, property damage, arson. all of those are different types of criminal behavior and there's a spectrum of severity that you can see there, but they're all different types of criminal behavior. I think it's helpful in looking at this topic to really approach it that there's kind of three, three levels that we need to look at to understand this properly. level one is the thing that initially got a person to engage in some type of criminal behavior. usually stealing, boosting something. it could be peer pressure from their friends. Their friends say, oh, I dare you to steal the chocolate bar from the store. And they feel that pressure and they do it. For some people though, stealing was a necessity. They didn't have any food at home. Their parents weren't working or their parents were in addiction. And they had to steal to survive. Others, they grew up poor. their basic physical needs were met, but all the kids at school had nice clothes and nice things, and they didn't have any of those nice things. they got tired of being poor. They wanted some nicer things. And they stole to get some nicer things. Sadly, in some families, parents got their children to steal. they would go into a store and their mom would get the child to steal. they were carrying out their mom or their dad's desires to get free stuff. And then for some kids, the kid that got idolized at school was the bad boy, the boy that stole, the boy that did drugs, all of those things. And they wanted to be the bad boy. They wanted to get kind of validation from the bad boy, the respect of the bad boy. And they engaged in criminal stuff in order to be the bad boy. And then for some, as they look at in their teen years at getting wealthy, getting lots of money, they could go the path of hard work and slow accumulation, but that may not ever get them rich, or they could go into criminal activity, which get them lots of money, fast, a good lifestyle. And that just seemed a more desirous route for them to take. what's important to understand then is Level Two. Why do some kids succumb to peer pressure to steal a chocolate bar where others don't? Why do some kids not care about the bad boy and not want to be him, but others do? What is understand issues that make a child vulnerable to fall into criminal activity. That becomes a key thing to understand. it's more than just peer pressure. There's something deep underneath that makes them vulnerable to peer pressure. And that's where we get into the complex trauma stuff. first, the child is just not happy. There's a discontent there. There's, because of the complex trauma, there's unresolved needs, there's unresolved pain, there's an emptiness. And what can happen is a fantasy belief that starts in the child's mind that says, if I had more money, if I was rich, if I had more things, then I would be happy. And that can set a child up to begin to think that criminal activity is the best way to get lots of money and things, and then I'll be happy. it's based on that. Deep, complex trauma where their needs weren't met, where there was a discontent due to abuse or neglect. The second one was a child who grows up who doesn't attach to parents in a secure way. there's not a secure attachment. they don't feel part of this family. They feel on the outside a black sheep. they long to connect. They long to feel they belong somewhere that they fit in. they will then be able to feel the way they want to feel. And that's what we're going to look at now. that's the first one. fit in. they will then go to their next sphere of influence outside the family, which is their peer group, and they will try to fit in with a group of peers. And if that group of peers is into being bad boys, then they will try to fit in there. if that need for connection is not met at home, they will be very vulnerable to go and get it met in a peer group that may not be healthy. And it could lead to criminal activity. Another thing that happens often in complex trauma is the child develops shame. I don't feel good enough. That's why I'm being neglected. That's why I'm being abused. That's why nobody's connecting with me. If I'm authentic, I get rejected and abandoned. I feel less than, not good enough. And how do I feel better about myself? , I need more money. I need. I need the respect of my friends. I need on and on. they begin to look to external things as the way to get respect and friends. And let's do criminal activity. Now I got more money. Now I'm going to have people that respect me because of what I do. And what you begin to see is this child is trying to get their needs met that weren't being met because of their complex trauma and their stress. And they're trying to get their needs met. And they're starting to see that crime is going to be the way to do that. Another thing that happens in complex trauma is often the child develops this deep anger and rebellion because life is not fair. Parents are not meeting their needs, but nobody's owning their stuff. they just start to rebel against it. And that can lead some into, I'm going to do crime. That's my way of rebelling against my parents. That's my way of hurting my parents. Part of that. Also, is my life is unfair. I'm angry at it. And then a sense of entitlement develops out of that. The world owes me. The rich owe me. I've been ripped off. Everybody's deprived me, not treated me properly. I deserve a better life and I'm going to grab it. what is important to realize that also sets a person up for this criminal activity is the soul. I'm not an expert on these things and I'm sure you're telling me this but I keep getting angry at it all the time. I don't want to talk too much about that material stuff because every time I listen to these kids I get motivated to do something about it. Every time we end up making these everybody Stark face full- existe is the same thing. Also, that makes that all about you and it's something that all the time that's the same thing. That's just kind of what America is but you have to do it differently for yourself. I just want to continue on and then I, all that about your circumstances, about your behavior, because to think honestly about stuff just going to bother your conscience. Then you get into distorted thinking about things, rationale to justify stuff. all of those things are happening in complex trauma and that just sets a person up to be a prime candidate to engage in criminal behavior. what I want you to realize is all of this shutting down of the very important alarm systems in our person, all of the unmet needs, all of the deep pain and discontent, constant survival mode is actually creating a person who's narcissistic. That I can do what I want, the rules don't apply to me, I'm better than everybody, I'm entitled and that becomes again a prime candidate. For criminal behavior. there's a narcissistic element that is being formed out of the deep shame and pain of complex trauma. Somebody has put it into kind of four categories. family related risk factors, that's what we've just described. All of the complex trauma that comes out of an abuse and neglect environment. Secondly, school related risk factors. a child that just doesn't achieve and do very in school or a child who's bullied or becomes a bullier, they are more prone to criminal behavior. And a child that just skips school a lot, doesn't care about school, they are more prone to fall into criminal behavior. Then that goes to community risk factors. a disadvantaged neighborhood, a very poor run-down neighborhood, not a whole lot of organizations within the community for the child to participate in, a community that's just neglected by the government and it's just run down. All kinds of garbage, disrepair happening, there's an availability of drugs, there's gangs that are happening, there's a high turnover within those communities, and there's no closeness in the communities, you just don't do things, in a way that's not good. you have to keep that in mind, as you're dealing with the problems. You don't want to just go back and forth and say oh, I'm , that's enough, that's enough, that's enough, that's enough, that's enough, that's enough, that's enough. There's no vulnerability to the community. things together. That sets up a child to be a higher risk for criminal behavior. And then the peer risk factors. And a child that doesn't feel connected at home then is prone to peer pressure and getting into gangs, etc. Hanging around with friends that are involved in criminal behavior, that condone criminal behavior, early involvement in criminal behavior, having all of their friends who've got problem behaviors, people that just aren't as smart and they just aren't thinking about a future, a career. They're just trying to survive. People with social awkwardness, anxiety issues, often become very vulnerable to get drawn into criminal behavior. that takes us to the next slide. That takes us to the third level. level one and two, the child tries it. Here's the underlying reasons why they are vulnerable to it. But then they get caught and most quit. But some go back to it. Some continue to do it even though they were caught and there was consequences. What causes a person to go back to it? A bunch of different reasons that you're going to get from people as to why they continue to do criminal behavior. Many of them are going to get caught and most quit. Some continue to do it even though they were caught and there was consequences. But then they get caught and most quit. But some continue to do it even though they were caught and most quit. Some continue to do it even though they were caught and most quit. Many are subconscious. They don't even realize all of it, but they will realize some of it. And number one, probably the most common is there's a rush. They get a rush out of planning it, the suspense of, am I going to be able to pull it off? And then when they do pull it off and not get caught, there's a huge rush. And what I want you to see is that rush medicates all the things that are going to be involved in the process. It makes all the underlying issues, the emptiness, the pain, the shame. It makes them feel better, makes them feel pleasure. And the rush becomes a powerful thing. Secondly, for many, it's fast money. It's a way to get money quickly and lots of it. And then a lifestyle, very instant, wealthy lifestyle. They can live high. That's a huge attraction to keep going back. For some, it becomes their identity. They now have gained respect as the bad boy, as the person who can supply drugs, as the person who can get extra things for people. And that identity is important to them. It's an identity that they think contains a lot of respect. Then for some, it's basically they hang around in a peer group where everybody's doing it. Everybody thinks that the way that they think about crime and justifying it. And because of their peer group, they just keep are drawn back into doing it, even though something in them might want to quit. For some, there's a shame element that goes to when they pull off crimes and don't get caught, they feel smarter and better than everybody else. And it really feeds the sense of shame. And it really feeds an egotism that a superior or anything. Others, they do it because they become drug addicts and they just need their drug fix. And the only way to get the money to get their drug fixes to steal some is just pure greed. They just want more and more. They think getting more is the answer. That's still that fantasy thinking that's going to make them happy. And then some, there's a sense of power that comes out of being a criminal that I get to do these things and get away with it. And I can manipulate people and do all of this stuff. There's power that comes out of that. again, what I want you to see is people that go back to it, the criminal activity in their subconscious mind is actually meeting a whole bunch of needs, fixing a whole bunch of needs. bunch of problems. It's fixing emptiness. It's fixing shame. It's gaining them respect. It's gaining them belonging and fitting in. All of those things are being met by criminal activity. And it seems to be a solution, the best way to have a good life. That's where they're coming from. Next thing I want to look at is five addictive criminal stages that happen. first of all, there's something that triggers a desire to go and commit a crime. that trigger, there's maybe a conscious trigger, but there's also a subconscious trigger. There's a deep shame, a deep emptiness, deep pain, all of those things that we talk about, that all of a sudden they think crime is going to be the solution to my deep inner stuff. it starts with something that triggers all of that. Soip Brady, who's written a lot about criminal behavior has said, the destructive and self defeating behavior that criminals experience is not driven by material or economic motives, but is simply individuals trying to enrich their empty shell identities. Then once they're triggered, there's still that initial conscience that says, don't do it. That's wrong. You're taking from other people you're going to hurt other people there has to be the second stage which is a moral neutralization and this is a very complex stage because you're playing mind games to justify doing it to get rid of the internal conflict that you're feeling the cognitive dissonance that you're feeling Brady again says the destructive and self defeating behavior that criminals experience is fueled by irrational thoughts the more a criminal engages in the activity the more criminals become skilled practitioners in the art of self deception some of the things that they do the mind games are called mollification and that is they downplay the seriousness of the crime or justifying or excuse making. And also with that, they blame others. They justify their poor choices. They make all kinds of excuses. they always have a good reason for why they're doing it, but it's not really the real reason why they're doing it. They would never admit that. And some of the s or the mollification that happens is, if I don't do it, somebody else will. somebody's going to sell drugs anyway, might as be me and I can make the money. Or I steal from people, but it doesn't hurt anybody because they have insurance. they're going to get it all back. Or, I'm not hurting anybody. I only steal things. It doesn't hurt anybody. Or they claim it's because others do it as . Or others have done far worse than what I'm doing, mine's not that bad. they have all kinds of excuses. And they're going to sell drugs anyway, might as be me and I can make the money. there's all kinds of reasons why they're doing it. it's a very strong argument that people would be guilty of trying to justify or mollify their behavior. Part of what is happening is that they fail to consider the injury to others. They fail to consider that, yes, others might have insurance, but they have to go through. They've been violated, that they have had somebody take their stuff. Their insurance rates are now going to go up. The cost of goods is now going to go up for everybody. They don't want to look at those consequences. They don't want to look at the cost of goods. They don't want to look at the cost of consequences, they just want to stick to their thing, it's not hurting anybody. And this type of thinking is called corrosion and cut off. And when you think of kind of engaging in a criminal activity, most people would immediately have their conscience says that's violating love, that's morally wrong, their conscience would bother them. Then their fear of getting caught would bother them. Then their desire to be a productive citizen is going to be violated. And then there could have religious beliefs that are getting in the way. you've got all kinds of deterrents that would immediately say don't do that criminal activity. what has to happen in the mind of a criminal is corrosion, which is I got to get rid of every deterrent, I got to corrode it that it gets rusty, and it gets rusty, and basically wears out, wears thin, and then I cut it off. I just block it out of my mind. they go through all kinds of mental gymnastics to get rid of their conscience, to get rid of the fear of getting caught, to get rid of religious sentiments, to get rid of being a productive citizen, and find some way to lessen the intensity of that until the time they can get to a point where they can just block it, where they can cut it off, and it no longer influences their thinking. that is a huge part of what is happening. it's a process. It's not something they instantly just go to, I'm going to commit a crime, let's do it. They got to go through this mental process where they lessen the intensity of the deterrents until they can get to a point where they can just block it, where they can cut it off, and it no longer influences their thinking. that leads to the third stage, and that is now they're going to commit the crime. again, Brady, the actual carrying out of criminal acts demands that criminals neutralize the unsavory aspects of their offenses, which we just talked about, lend meaning to inexplicable behaviors, they got to somehow justify it, make it sound it's good. Here the criminal behavior is paired with, now they're committing the act, exciting sensations, a strong, intense, emotional, and emotional excitement associated with the risk of engaging in criminal behavior. There's an anticipated visceral feeling or mental excitement and stimulation, if not an elation, a thrill, a rush, and even a sense of euphoria. I've had many people that engage in criminal behavior tell me that when they're getting ready to go and commit a crime, all of a sudden they got to go to the bathroom and void their bowels because they're excited. There's such a visceral excitement and intensity that is happening inside of them. then they commit the crime, and that takes them to the fourth stage, the post-criminal act. They get away with it. There's an exhilaration, typically a flooding of mood, elevating feelings, similar to an adrenaline rush accompanied with thoughts that synthetically increase their sense of -being. In short, the criminal act can help in the process of getting them to the point where they're ready to go. This takes them to the last stage, which is the heat of the crime that's happening within the driver's lanes, and that's the level 5, the level 8 ofność, where more and more criminals feel the brain is shouldn't be up ahead where more and more cannibalism is experiencing multiple disputes. But there is sure to be a way that recommendationumer, -being turns overnight into nothing and nothing. Say till a shooting starts at 30 thermal, my ex, get outta here, we'reада ironically how it begins. followers, social media is available on all of our social media platforms. clubs in North America. But there is still anxiety as to why it takes long. that is post-criminal act confusion. It's almost a roller coaster. They hit this high and now they're going to descend to this low. And the third and fourth stage of exhilaration and adrenaline rush is replaced with new dramatic and unexpected changes in emotional awareness. Here they become confused, depressed, and socially withdrawn as experience withdrawal- reactions. they might start sweating, getting headaches, anxiety, nausea, heart arrhythmia. And on a psychological level, they experience confusion, guilt, afterthoughts, misgivings, anxiety, depression, dramatic mood shifts ranging from feelings of sadness to hopelessness. that's the five stages that take place for most in committing a crime. But what I want you to see also is that this criminal behavior stuff begins to operate an addiction. They get a trigger, then they start, they do the act and they get the rush. Just a person using drugs and alcohol, there's chemicals released in the brain that cause them to feel good, that cause them to feel very excited, tons of pleasure. And they go back to it every time there's an emptiness, every time there's pain, every time there's emotions they don't want. They now go back to the criminal activity, just a drug addict goes back to the drugs to medicate all of those feelings that usually are in the subconscious realm. And criminal behavior can become an addiction for many people. let me go to the characteristics of a person with criminal behavior. first for many, and you can again, we're going to go about 30 of these, you can check off the ones that might apply to you. But there's very much an instant gratification. And that makes them impulsive, that makes them, they don't think of planning ahead. They don't think of kind of time that's realistic to get a nice house and a nice car and good vacations. They want it now. They want the best. They think they must have the best and they must have it now. it's very much still living out of their limbic brain. We're going to see that over and over again. They want instant gratification, instant pleasure, instant success, instant wealth, all of it now. Then there's this reckless disregard for safety to self or others. risks taking, hurting others, that becomes a key part of their, who they are. Next, consistent irresponsibility. just, they don't want the responsibility of holding down a job, of working hard, of financial obligations. They want to be able to do what they want to do and still kind of have lots of money. And there's an irresponsibility to them. Then a lack of remorse. they do stuff, but then they just justify it. They don't have remorse that results in change. They might have moments of regret or moments of emotions, but not that brings about true change. And then lying. they, lying becomes a way of life. And they have premeditated lying where they plan what they're going to say, but then there's habitual lying. They just lie about everything. They're constantly shading the truth. They're constantly shading the truth. They're constantly having secrets, not giving you the full story. their whole life becomes very much around lying, dishonesty. I think it's important to understand that there's an antisocial behavior that's often very much underneath criminal behavior. And this might be helpful because you can begin to spot this in children. antisocial behaviors are disruptive behaviors that hurt others, that hurt self, that disregard rules, that violate love. it's a child that is not able to connect. And they just get to the point where they lash out. They want to hurt somebody. There's a ton of anger that just needs to be vented. And they start this very isolated behavior, antisocial behavior, venting of anger, hurtful, getting back, because there's much pain inside. Now antisocial behavior tends to go on a spectrum from very severe to less severe, but it's all antisocial behavior. here's some of the signs and symptoms of an antisocial personality disorder that you can look for. a disregard for and wrong. Rules don't apply to me. Don't care. Persistent lying or just coming to a place where you're trying to exploit other people. Using charm to manipulate people. being very charming, but it's all manipulation. It's not genuine love at all. Intense egotism feeling superior and needing to display that. Recurring difficulties with the law. And a person with antisocial behavior, what they're seeing is basically, comes out of severe abuse and neglect. And that means they have and have experienced and enter into poor relationships, abusive relationships. And then another sign is just irresponsible work behavior. just not doing a good job, not showing up, being late, just not being responsible. And then repeatedly violating the of others using intimidation, dishonesty, misrepresenting the facts. They just don't care about others. They don't love others the way they love themselves. There's a double standard that I treat myself very different from and I want to be treated very different from how I treat you. Hostility, lots of anger issues that can end up in aggression. Aggressiveness, violence, lack of empathy, lack of remorse, unnecessary risk-taking, dangerous behaviors, and then a failure to learn from negative consequences. they get caught. There's negative consequences. They just don't learn from it. They just go back to it. again, what you see is antisocial behavior comes out of deep complex trauma, deep shame, and a narcissist. And that's a narcissistic thing. all of those characteristics are characteristics of a narcissist. The next characteristic of a person with criminal behavior is what has become known as the very good person stance. And basically they have to keep telling themselves that they're basically a very good person. They love their dog. They love their family. They love their elders. they have very sentimental feelings to children, to animals, to their family. To the elderly. And they go, see, I'm a good person. And it's a type of way of denying looking at themselves totally and to see themselves accurately. They just see one part of themselves and try to make that their whole self. And then they use that to be able to justify continuing to do criminal behavior. , I'm still, I'm a really good person. I do this a little bit, but that's all . I'm a good person. I'm a good person. Then often with in criminal behavior, there's a criminal pride that develops. And that is just, they're kind of proud of what they do. They think it makes them better than others. I think they're smarter than others. They got more money than others. there's a real sense of superiority that develops, but what is important is they have to maintain this image. That they are superior to everybody. That criminal pride is huge for them. And often with that is there's a sense that they're unique, that they're just special. They're one of a kind. They're different from other people. They're in a class, all of their own. what you see from that is there's just this massive shame that is going into this highly overcompensating superiority stance. But with that, there's a sense of superiority. And with that, what they've found is that criminal pride, that uniqueness is there. But there's moments that they have what is called zero state where they actually feel their shame. They feel a zero. They feel absolutely worthless. They're not being productive in positive ways in society. They're not loving people. They're actually hurting society. They're hurting others. And they just feel terrible about themselves. And they just feel terrible about themselves. They feel hopeless to get out. They feel life is futile. And they go to this very dark place, often just for a short period of time. And then they get back to that pride stance. Another common thing is a victim stance. If they're held accountable for their actions, it's always somebody else's fault. There's always somebody else's to blame. They couldn't help it. They view themselves as I was poorly treated. I'm a victim of a very awful. Culture of a very awful system. And victim, victim, victim is their mindset, never taking ownership for their behavior. And what comes with that is they say, I can't change. I can't act responsibly. I can't hold down a job. I can't be a consistent father. But at the very same time, they think there's nothing. They can't do anything. They can't do to succeed as a criminal. they use, I can't as an excuse to grow up, to get out of their limbic brain, to become responsible and acting in healthy ways. Often there's a sense of entitlement. If I want it, I need it. they don't distinguish between legitimate needs and want to them. If they want it, they must need it. And if I want it and I need it, I should have it. I deserve as much as someone else who has worked harder than me. People owe me. The world owes me. I have to get my piece before you get yours. I deserve more than others. I deserve things for nothing. The world should suit me, not me suit the world. Things should go my way. Just that very narcissistic entitlement often begins to develop. And then there's a lack of trust. They just don't trust people. And it's partly because they don't trust themselves. They know they're not trustworthy. Now they demand others trust them if they're in a gang, but they don't trust others. There's a double standard. Now, many will temporarily trust somebody, but only if they've got something over them to force that person to be trustworthy. Otherwise they just don't trust. With that, there's a refusal to be dependent. I do everything myself. I'm independent. Dependent. Being dependent to them makes them weak. It makes them vulnerable. The problem is there's times in their life when they do need to depend on others, but they just refuse to look at that as being dependent. I just needed you for this little thing, but I'm not dependent. And then there's often just a huge longing for control for power. That's a drive for them. And crime, criminal activity. Gives them that feeling of power and control. Anger we've talked about is again, a huge part of their life. A deep of anger from childhood that they're still rebelling against the system. They're still acting out. And then that can show up in their personal relationships where they become violent. If they don't get their own way, they intimidate others. That's their way of gaining and maintaining control and power. Anger becomes a tool that they use all the time. Then often with criminals, they've shut down empathy for others, but they're still very sentimental. Sentimental about their moms. Sentimental about their pets. Sentimental about babies. Sentimental about their new, I'm in love. And now I'm going to buy roses and gifts and romance this person. they, in some ways they feel they're very loved. They're very loving, but it's very narrow in its scope. Most people with criminal behavior where it becomes an addiction, a way of life. There's a ton of energy that they have. And they get an idea and all of a sudden they have a high level of mental activity, thinking about it, planning for it. And they're just bursting with energy. They can't sit still. Next one is. Very significant. And there's tons of fear, fear of getting caught fear that their life is not going to amount to anything. They have fear of injury, fear of death, fear of being disrespected, fear of losing face, fear, fear, fear, fear, but they will never admit that they're afraid. They think they're afraid of nothing. They're actually afraid of experiencing the sensation of fear. they have shut down fear much that they don't feel at a conscious level, but it rules their subconscious. The next thing that we find is fragmentation. And it's there's a Jekyll and Hyde. they have to compartmentalize their life over here. They're a loving dad. They're, they're trying to be respectable in their community, but over here they're selling drugs. They're stealing. They're doing all kinds of stuff. They're doing all kinds of things that they know is wrong. That is hurting people. And they got a compartmentalize their life. they fragment. Now that starts to cause problems. And here they're playing with their child. They're overwhelmed with love for their child, but then their stuff gets triggered. And now they're stealing money from their kids in order to go buy drugs. They're there's this fragmentation. They promise. They're there for their kids and spend the day with their kids. And then all of a sudden they changed their mind and they're out with their buddies doing something. It becomes a huge issue for them. This contradictory internal world where Jekyll and Hyde is happening. And the one that seems to be getting stronger and it's causing them to break commitments to do stuff that violates love. That begins hurting those they love the most. Many. Have a perfectionism. They in a whole bunch of life don't care about perfection at all. But when it comes to doing what they do, they have to do it perfectly. And then there's a suggestibility and it's still this comes out of that shame that need to belong. And if somebody else in their peer group makes a suggestion, we should do this. It has a powerful influence over them. If somebody outside of their group. Says you need to change and makes a suggestion as to how they change. They resist that. But within the group where they want to get accepted, they're very vulnerable to suggestions. Many with criminal behavior are known for deferring or putting things off. And it's kind of in three areas. they keep saying they're going to make the ultimate score, the ultimate crime. But they just. Keep putting off actually doing it. Or I'm going to make the ultimate crime, get the big score. Then I'm going to quit. I'm going to do one more job. Then I'm going to quit. And they just keep putting that off. Keep putting that off. Or I'm going to start becoming more responsible. I'm going to start doing better habits. I'm going to start doing stuff every day and paying my bills, writing this letter, doing my taxes. And they keep putting off becoming responsible. that leads to this failure to assume obligation. the concept of obligation to a person with that criminal mindset. Obligations interfere with what they want to do. Obligations are viewed as a position of weakness and vulnerability to somebody else controlling you. obligations are irritating to them. And if you try to tell them they need to be obligated to, to their kids, to their job, to a responsible life, they can often get quite angry about that. Because obligations just interfere with what they want to do. again, it's their limbic brain is running the show, wanting to do whatever they want to do, when they want to do it, get instant gratification. And if anybody operates as their cortex and says you need to grow up and become responsible, they get angry about it. they're always looking for. The easy path. Who wants hard work? Who wants obligations? Who wants daily routine? Who wants structure? Who wants habits that you have to do every day? No, they want an easy path where there's not hard work, where they can just have a good life handed to them. And they think that's the path to happiness is the easy path. And part of that is they don't want. To make an effort to endure adversity. They don't want to sit in uncomfortable emotions in hard work and working hard waiting for the benefits to come later. They want to put the seed in the ground and have an instant crop. They don't want to endure waiting for that crop to grow, weeding that crop, watering that crop. They want it now with no adversity and not having to endure. Adversity. And they don't want to expend effort. They don't want to have to go through hardship. They don't want to have to go through obstacles and frustrations. They just want to be instantly a big shot. again, it's the limbic brain instant gratification. The next thing is many people in criminal behavior have never learned how to make good decisions, to become responsible. they don't know how to reason out the pros and cons to go on fact-finding missions to weigh out the costs of something to weigh out the various options available to you. They don't they've never done that. They don't know how to do that. And they're afraid to go ask somebody to teach them because that might make them look stupid. That might make them look they don't know what they're doing. And to save face, they just don't want to ever learn those tools. And they don't want to ever learn those tools. they just keep making impulsive decisions that they hope will lead to the good life that they want. Next one is that many who end up and the longer they stay in this lifestyle, the more secretive they become, the more closed they become. You can talk to them and they'll talk about a thousand subjects, but nothing deeply honest, deeply personal, being open and vulnerable is taboo. And that leads to them being very much alone. They might be surrounded by people, but they feel totally alone. And then sexuality is an interesting one for many of them. And that is they have lots of sex, but they don't have satisfying sex. Sex becomes about conquest. Sex is seeing another person as their possession that they own. But sex is no longer that attachment. But sex is no longer that attachment. But sex is no longer that attachment. But sex is no longer that attachment. But sex is no longer that attachment-based satisfying sex. The final one is super optimism. if they get an idea, they immediately think, I can do this. I can pull this off. This is going to happen. And it's as good as done in their mind to get an idea about a crime, etc. They're super optimistic. They can get rid of all the doubts, all the fears, all the misgivings, and get to this super optimistic place. What happens and what is important to understand is that when many of these people actually get caught and go into recovery and say, I want to change, many still have that mindset. And what they think is, I'm going to be successful in recovery. I've made up my mind and I'm going to do it. They don't think about what do I need to change? They don't think about the hard work of recovery. They don't think of the thousands of things that I need to change. They don't think of the thousands of decisions that are going to have to be made that are different from how they would have made those decisions in the past. They just think, I made up my mind. I'm going to be super successful in recovery. All it takes is a decision and the willpower. And that causes many to go in recovery. And they think, I don't need to do all this hard work. I don't need to do this. I just made up my mind. And they fail over and over again. let me go to the, what then is healing? for a person who comes out of a criminal behavior, you got to get past that super optimism, magical thinking place. Change recovery is not the result of one decision and then pure willpower. It means thousands of decisions, a total overhaul of your entire life. It means healing and changing at deep, deep, levels, healing, deep wounds, dealing with trauma, healing, shame, dealing with deep fears, deep lies. That's what it's about. There's not a quick magical fix. It requires hard work every day for the rest of the life. New habits, new attitudes, new behaviors, boundaries with old friends, building new healthy friends, dealing with triggers, dealing with temptation. It's a ton of work and change. It does not happen magically. And if you're not willing to do it, you will keep going back to that old way and it will get darker and darker and the consequences will get more and more severe. under lying stuff, there's a deep shame element that every person in criminal activity has that has to be dealt with. Then there's a need to start connecting with safe people. You got to set boundaries with all the old peers because they're going to keep trying to pull you back. You got to create a new surrogate family with safe, healthy people that can be hard. You feel a misfit. You feel you don't belong. You got to get rid of all that. I'm special. I'm different thinking. You got to be willing to do this connection work. And then you got to find somebody. You don't need to tell everybody your secrets and all the stuff that you've done. But you got to find one safe person who's not going to judge you. Who's not going to blab it that you can start to get open and honest with that is such an important part of the healing thing. I don't know how much of this applies to you. Or if it applies to you at all, but if it does, I hope this really helps you get a realistic understanding of your behaviors where they came from. But that changing them is not some magical little thing where you just make up your mind and it's going to happen. It's going to take a ton of work and change and I hope you're willing to do it. It's worth it. If you are , that's the end of another Friday night. Thanks again for being here. Thanks for being with us. Have a great weekend. We'll see you next.