let's say you say, I am going to just be fully present to myself, and I am going to be on the same page as myself and aware of what's going on inside me. And you do that. You start to journal a bit, and then what you realize, though, is I don't what I'm having to live with. There's a lot of painful emotions. There's a lot of negative thinking. And it's not comfortable, and I don't know how to resolve it. And your brain subconsciously says, let's shut her down. Let's disconnect from ourselves that we don't feel anything. And what you need to understand about this, if you've been going through it, is this happens subconsciously. And that's what makes it dangerous for people in recovery, is that this disconnection can be happening without them even realizing it. And sometimes they don't begin to realize it until it's too late. And that's why I want to talk about it, because to me, not being aware of what's going on inside of you is one of the most dangerous things for a person with trauma and recovery. why do people from complex trauma disconnect from themselves easily? And I think there's two reasons for it. First of all, it happened in early childhood. If you weren't able to. You weren't able to connect with your parents. You tried to form a bond. You tried to attach. You tried to talk about stuff and you got laughed at. You got put down. And what happened in all of that as you were neglected or abused is that you began to say, if my parents don't want to connect with me, I must be a really bad person. I don't want to connect with myself. Because to connect with myself would be torture. It would be connecting with myself. It would be connecting with myself. It would be connecting with myself. It would be connecting to somebody that I'm starting to hate. And because of that, the brain at an early age for most people begins to say, connecting with self is a terrible thing because I need to get away from self because nobody else self and now I don't even myself. The second thing that can happen in complex trauma is the challenge or the dilemma that the brain has with all of these negative emotions that it can't handle. It can't handle. It can't handle. It can't handle. It can't handle. It can't resolve. you have anger. You have fear. You have depression. You have anxiety. And the brain's trying to find solutions and it can't. And at some point, the brain says, I can't continue to live with all of these unresolved negative emotions since that's what I'm living with 99 of the time. The only way I know how to resolve these painful emotions is to shut down, to disconnect from my emotions. To stop feeling. To stop feeling. To stop feeling. To harden myself I don't feel anymore. And that's what makes drugs and alcohol attractive for people with complex trauma. Because once they find drugs and alcohol, they go, I have just found the perfect solution for my unresolved negative emotions. Now I can numb them and escape them and go to pleasure places. That I wouldn't be able to get to in the natural world. And drugs and alcohol become the main way of numbing and avoiding, of escaping all of these negative unresolved emotions. what is the result of disconnecting? Because a lot of people will say to me, what's the big deal? I don't care. I disconnect. I it that way. I don't think it causes me any problems. let me give you some of the problems that come out of disconnecting. The first, and this is something that I've learned in studying for this, is there's a new type of mental health category, at least to me that it's new, and it's called depersonalization disorder. And some psychologists consider it to be the third most common disorder in our world today outside of depression. And what we're going to do is we're going to look at the three main types of depression and anxiety. they would say depression and anxiety are the most common and the most devastating. And then DPD, depersonalization disorder. A guy named Jeffrey Bugle, I believe is how you say it. He's a medical journalist and he's written a book called Stranger to Myself. And it's about depersonalization disorder. And what he basically says is that people who have trauma and they become a stranger to themselves. And I'd say probably one of the most common statements that I hear clients say to me is, I don't know who I am. And that's what we mean by depersonalization. you grow up where you wear your mask, the roles that you fulfill, but you've been running from looking at the real you or what you think is the real you. And you get into recovery at 30, 40, 50. 60 years of age and you go, I don't know who I am. And that is really a painful realization for people in recovery. And they can get really down on themselves that they don't know who they are. But that's one of the serious results of disconnecting, especially early in childhood. The second thing is that people say disconnecting doesn't affect me because I just have a problem. I don't know who I am. I just live out of my brain. The reality is, is that even though you're not feeling your emotions, if you have complex trauma, your limbic brain is still running the show. And that's your emotion center. And you are responding to emotions getting triggered without even being aware of it. And you are making decisions once your emotions get triggered. In a nanosecond, you make a decision. And act. And you're not even aware of the dynamics of what is happening. And you end up making bad decisions. the point is this, even though you disconnect from your emotions, your emotions are still running the show. And that is important to understand. The third result of disconnecting is that a lot of people would say, I feel a robot at times. I go through the motions of the world. I feel a robot. I feel I'm a robot. I feel I'm a robot. I feel I'm a robot. I feel I'm a robot. I feel I'm a robot. I feel I'm a robot. I feel I'm a robot. But I also don't feel negative emotions. But I also don't feel positive emotions. And I can go through doing what I have to do every day. And it's just kind of this empty feeling, robot existence. But what you have to understand is that robot mode is preprogrammed. It's pre-programmed with a default setting. That is the stuff that you don't . And when you go into robot mode where you check out in your brain and you're not connecting to your emotions, that robot is taking you in negative directions. It is creating the very things that you've been trying to avoid. And it is a negative force for you once you disconnect and go into robot mode. Another thing that happens when you disconnect is that it becomes very difficult to be present. you can be with your kids, but because you're disconnected internally, you have trouble being present to them. And you send the message to your children that they're not worth connecting to because you're not present to them. And that starts the shame stuff that you have experienced all of your life. let me take that a little bit further. What are some of the things the brain does, and again, often subconsciously, to disconnect? you might see, I'm going to go through a long list, you might see that they started for you early in your life. what did the brain begin to do as methods to help you disconnect? the obvious one for many people is the best way for them to connect is just be busy in distractions. Because if you're constantly, you're constantly busy, you're constantly busy, you're constantly busy, you're constantly busy, you're constantly busy, you're constantly busy, you're constantly busy, doing stuff, constantly playing video games, constantly tidying up, then you don't have to be present to yourself and feel anything. The second one for some people is they have just become highly analytical. They live in their head, always analyzing problems. Now their brain is saying that makes them healthy. That's what they think is the truth about themselves. But really, it's a way of avoiding feeling. And , because they live in their head, they tend to think emotions are useless, unnecessary, even bad. And they pride themselves that they are in their head, but actually they're still being run by emotions. They're just disconnected from that. We talked about the third one, which is people that just get to a place where they shut down and they say, I don't want to feel. And they just don't allow any emotions. They push everything. They just don't let their emotions come down until they're hard and out of touch that they don't even have awareness of that part of themselves. Another way that some people disconnect is through fantasy. I don't my present world. I don't want to connect with it. I don't want to connect with self. let's escape into a world of fantasy where I'm perfect, where everything's the way I want it. And that is a much nicer place to live. And some do that. Others, they just go to, I'm going to be positive. I'm going to think happy thoughts. I'm going to be positive all the time about everything. Always upbeat. And again, they might pride themselves that they aren't influenced negatively by stuff. But for a lot of people, that is a way of disconnecting from what they're really feeling. as soon as they feel something negative, pain, sadness, anxiety, instead of admitting it and dealing with it and resolving it, they just escape to their positive little world and avoid dealing with the problems. And eventually over time, that will cause them a lot of difficulty. Another thing that some people do is they just focus on one emotion. And let's say it's anger. they just say, I'm angry, or they focus on their anger. And to them, then they don't feel any other emotions because they're only allowing themselves. They're only allowing themselves to feel that one. And it's a subtle type of disconnection. Some people disconnect by just being involved in everybody else's problems. Some are just involved in service all the time, helping people out. It's a type of distraction from myself. It's a type of not dealing with my own problems, but I'll focus on everybody else's. Let me just stop and give you a little bit of a test on how to deal with your own problems. And it's a little bit more difficult than you think. I'll give you a little bit of a test. if you were in a car with somebody, or you're in a room with just you and one other person having a conversation, and all of a sudden the other person stopped talking and you couldn't think of anything away to talk about, and there's a moment of silence. How would that make you feel? And if that moment of silence went on for 10, 15 seconds and the other person still isn't starting to talk, how many of you would just have to blurt out something to try and get a conversation going because you can't stand silence? That's part of the complex trauma disconnection thing. Another type of disconnection is to just focus on your external world, your body, your diet, your healthy eating, your exercise. you're always wrapped up. And you think you're working on yourself, but you're only working on the external parts of yourself. And it's a way of disconnecting from the internal parts of themself. And then in the most extreme cases of trauma, the brain has to go to extreme measures to try and protect somebody who is being traumatized, either brutally sexually abused, and what can happen in that case, is what we call dissociative identity disorder. The person actually dissociates from what is happening in the here and now. And if there's sexual abuse, they can picture themself on the ceiling watching it's happening to somebody else. Or they can go and put themselves on a beach in Florida and just be totally out of touch with what is happening. that used to be called multiple personality disorder. And it's really in the extreme types of danger and trauma, the only way the brain knows how to protect the child is to splinter as a person and develop other personalities to protect that child. And some of it is dissociating from reality. those are all kinds of different ways that the brain tries to disconnect from living. With self that it doesn't and doesn't want to spend time with. Now let's move to today. You could be going in your recovery and you're connected to yourself, you're self-aware, you're doing stuff every day where you're taking an emotional inventory, a spiritual inventory, and checking out your relationships, and you're really conscientiously staying connected. And you're finding a lot of benefits comes from that. Because you're noticing different trends and gaining new insights into yourself. But what you need to be aware of is that something can happen and can trigger your brain to disconnect without you even realizing it. what are the things that would trigger your brain starting to disconnect today? Number one, extra busyness. if your life all of a sudden goes from, I just want to go to the bathroom, to just a quiet routine, to all kinds of commotion, all kinds of activity, drama happening because your kids are around, because you got to take care of all these extra needs for them. All of a sudden you can find yourself disconnecting without even realizing it. And extra drama and commotion triggers it. Another one is as stress increases, what people find is that it reaches a point of tolerance and then your brain disconnects if the stress goes beyond that point. And that's your brain saying, I can't deal with this, it's time to disconnect. stress can cause disconnection. Depression is another thing that can cause disconnection and anxiety. what the brain is saying, I'm living with depression and anxiety, I can't resolve this, I don't it, it's painful stuff, and I just want to disconnect. And I just need to disconnect. That's the only way I know how to live with this. Now something that I want you to realize is that those first ones that I just mentioned to you all involve cortisol in the brain. Anxiety, that's a fear. Depression, extra busyness and stress. when cortisol is in the brain, you disconnect from a lot of things because you go into survival mode. And survival mode, requires disconnection from emotions because you don't have time to deal with that. You just have to survive. be aware of that. Other things are other unresolved emotions. if you can't resolve depression and can't resolve anxiety, the brain starts to disconnect. The same is true if it can't resolve boredom or loneliness. All of those things, if it tries to resolve it and it can't, the brain will eventually say, it's time to disconnect. That's the only solution to these emotions that I can't resolve. Change can trigger disconnection because now you're in a new circumstance. You're on heightened alert. Your limbic brain is triggered and you start to disconnect. Also being overtired. You just have no energy. You just are trying to get through an issue. You're trying to get through another day. And for a lot of people, they disconnect because it takes energy to be self-aware and that is a dangerous time. Another thing that people can do is procrastinate. But as they procrastinate, they're adding stress because they got more jobs that need to be done that they've been avoiding. And at some point, that stress will cause them to disconnect. One other thing that causes people to disconnect or triggers it. Certain anniversaries, certain people, certain events, certain places, geographical places. you could go to a place and without even being aware of it, it could trigger a memory of something that happened there many years ago that was traumatic and all of that comes up inside of you and your brain goes to disconnect because it's back into survival mode. those are some of the most common triggers of disconnection today. knowing that, we still don't quite have enough information. What are early indicators that I am disconnecting? Because it happens subconsciously. What can I learn about myself I can catch disconnection sooner than I have before? Because if I disconnect for too long, I am going to be in big trouble. And the earlier I disconnect, the better I can detect that I am disconnecting, the better. this again is all about self-awareness. Somebody has said once a habit has been brought to the conscious level, you have a habit that you just do subconsciously without even realizing it, once it's brought to the conscious level, it is no longer a habit, it is now a choice that you make. look for this. If you realize that you are starting to speed up internally, and what I would say to clients is, most of us have a normal RPM setting. Our engine, our motor runs at a certain RPM. If we are about to go to a social situation or undertake a task, it will speed up to prepare us for that extra activity. And what can happen for a lot of people is if they start speeding up and catch it, they go, why am I speeding up? And then they realize, oh, I got some speed. They realize, oh, I got some stress happening here. And they realize they're starting to disconnect. be aware of speeding up both adrenaline in your thinking and in your activity and in your emotional world, getting more charged up. Very important. Next one. Be aware of times where you are sliding into being a robot. if all of a sudden in a day you realize that you are just going through the motions, you're not even consciously thinking about what you're doing, that could be a warning sign that you're disconnecting. Next one. And this is a big one for a lot of people is that all of a sudden you feel yourself drawn into your favorite escape activities. you just want to play video games all day and you've been doing , but now all of a sudden you just feel a pull to just want to avoid life and play video games. Usually, a great warning sign that you're starting to disconnect and your brain wants to keep disconnecting. If you're disconnecting, you will also probably feel internal resistance whenever you need to fulfill a responsibility. you need to phone somebody. You need to go and do something that you promised to do. And all of a sudden on that day you just resist. You don't want to do that. Often a sign that you're disconnected. Disconnecting both from yourself and from people. Another thing that you can look for is just keep emotions that might happen. you might wake up one morning and realize I'm totally out of touch with my emotions. I just know that I'm feeling sadness and anger. And that's all I'm aware of. I need to stop because I'm disconnecting from my emotions. I need to stop and reconnect. Some people realize all of a sudden they're just emotionally numb. They just don't feel anything. Whereas others, they realize that they just cry at the drop of a hat. They're watching a commercial on TV and all of a sudden they're bawling. Now this could be disconnection. It could be other things as . But if all of a sudden you're finding you're crying at the drop of a hat, it's a warning that you need to stop and figure out what's going on if that's not your normal. And then you'll find that you don't regulate your emotions. , all of a sudden you are getting your anger triggered. And in a nanosecond, you're going from zero to 100. And that doesn't normally happen. And all of a sudden you're realizing I'm not regulating my emotions. , I'm disconnecting. Another one for some people is they start eating more emotional, eating mindlessly. And that can be a warning sign that they are disconnecting. , that is important to understand. Another one. If you're disconnecting, most people will feel a certain amount of discontent. They feel antsy. They feel unsettled. They can't just relax. With that, for many people, they just all of a sudden notice they're more irritable, more edgy, crabby, even a bit depressed. All of those things could be signs of disconnection. Or you go to the other extreme and you're just totally out of touch with how you feel. You don't even know what your mood is. You're just out of touch. Others just check out. They're in a group. They get bored. They're checking out. And that can lead people to start go back to addictive behaviors. The final one that some people will have as early warning sign is they start to realize that they're disconnecting from others. And that can be a sign that you're also disconnecting. from yourself. those are very important things. And I hope you realize that for most people in recovery, if they start disconnecting, many will relapse within a day or two. If they've been in recovery for a while, they might last for a week or two. But the longer they stay disconnected, the greater the danger is for them. And this is such an important thing to stay connected. how do we do that? What are tools that will enable me to connect and stay connected? we're going to just focus on connecting with yourself because that's where all of this starts. And there's an element where you have to deal with your shame because shame says I don't myself. The reason I was abandoned or neglected or abused by others because I think I'm unlovable. And I've been running from myself all my life. And you have to begin to say, I got to go. I got to work on that and heal my shame because I know I have value and I know that I am worth something. you begin dealing with shame. the goal is to develop a relationship with yourself. That's what connecting is all about. Becoming your own friend. what I'd encourage is that you begin to set aside some time every day where you can be with yourself quietly. And that can go for five minutes, 15 minutes, an hour. But you begin to build a relationship with yourself. Now some of you with small children might not be able to do that. The only way that you can have a relationship with yourself might be when you go to bed at night and you finally are in quiet. And that is a big thing for you. But once you have that quiet time, take some time to . Take some time to just meditate on something that you've learned or something that's important for you to be reminded of. Take some time to just connect and take an inventory of what you're feeling, what was tough about today, what was good about today. Be grateful. And then begin to get in touch with, what do I really have a passion for? What is it that makes me get excited and makes me want to get involved in? Get to know yourself. Sometimes when you do that, some people will find it very helpful to journal and begin to write those kind of things down. Another thing that some people might have to do when they get that time in the first minute alone with themselves is do grounding exercises. Calm themselves down. Because it's really easy to say, here's my 15 minutes of quiet time with myself and just rush through it. And just go through the motions and just go through the motions. And then you'll get to the point where you can really connect with yourself. And that's what I'm talking about. And that's why I say, if you're not truly connected, you're not truly connected. you might have to slow yourself down. Something else that might help you is to have somebody in your life that you can talk to about what you're learning about yourself and get their opinion and insights about what they know to be true about you. that's something, we need to learn to be genuine with ourselves because knowing that you are going to be part of us and all the other aspects of us and the other parts of us is the way through healing all manifestations of the physical and emotional body. It is how we experience deeper, more meaningful connection with others and learn how to take care of our own needs moment to moment. Thank you.