anger never led to anything good. It only led to more pain. And it's hard to believe or even think that anger might be a good thing in certain situations. here's how anger was designed to work. In us, we have this built-in, without even realizing it, moral system of what is love. And we know that if you love somebody and want a healthy relationship, you have to be honest, you have to be reliable, you have to be faithful, you have to communicate, you have to respect each other, you have to be consistent and fair. That's built in. It's into our DNA. if somebody lies, what do we do? We get angry. And what the anger is saying is, alert, alert. Alert, something is wrong here that should not continue because if it continues, it will damage this relationship and it will damage each other. anger was designed, number one, to alert you that something was either unloving, disrespectful, unfair, and not true. And then the second thing, it was to give you the motivation to make it again. And it was to give you the motivation to make it again. And it was to give you the motivation to make it again. And it was to give you the motivation to say, we got to talk about this. that it could be resolved that the relationship would go back to honesty and fairness and consistency and reliability. anger was a beautiful system that was designed to protect love and loving relationships. That's important. And secondly, anger was designed to be resolved. that if something's unloving, it will not be resolved. It resolves it, and then the anger goes away. There's no more need for it because it is resolved. ? that's the original design. And what helps that whole system is that when you are angry, your brain releases a chemical called cortisol. And that chemical is only released with anger and fear, slash stress. Danger. and fear, slash stress. Danger. Corsosol is the chemical that gives you the adrenaline rush. It gives you extra energy. It makes you hyper-focused. And it is saying, this has to get fixed. This has to get resolved. And it's giving you all the help possible to have the energy and the desire to resolve this, to return it to love. what happens in complex trauma? You live with stuff not being fair. You live with lies and secrets. You live with unfaithfulness and lack of consistency and disrespect. And you're getting angry all the time as a kid. Because you're getting hurt. Your needs aren't being met. You're trying to resolve it. And you get angry to want to resolve it. And what happens when you get angry? You get punished. You get punished. You can't resolve it. what is the only option available to a child who is feeling anger for all the reasons, but they can't resolve the problem that's causing the anger, the problem that is the unloving behaviors? If they can't resolve it and they're being hurt for showing that anger, they've got to stuff it down. They've got to push it down. And that starts the formation. And that's the formation of LAVA. And LAVA is suppressed healthy anger. That you were in a situation that in order to survive, your only option was the stuff. And that you learned how to do it. Now let me just say this. Some children who are maybe bigger and taller than other kids, they stuff their anger at home. And when they were outside of the home, they vented their anger by bullying other kids, by mistreatment of property, arson, mistreatment of animals. But all of those things come from angry children who haven't been able to resolve their anger in a healthy way. they start vending it to weaker things than they are. And that describes many of you. Now here's what they're finding with trauma. Actually I'm your partner at Okinawa. Because we're thinking after najlep, six months, the chronic rápido-coronavirus event happened and we've heard some crazy stuff. I've've just seen somebody's 50th birthday through aysssh acupoint in LA wellbeing. And one of them have been able to crawl down to their 50, now at the mayor's office, could really touch someone. they stay stuck in full activation mode now the slightest little thing that can happen that makes them anger and they don't just respond a little bit they respond in full activation mode they flip the response doesn't match the trigger and that's what many of you are now realizing that you can be going through a day and all it takes is the tiniest little thing that annoys you and you lose it and you go into very dangerous places with dangerous behavior next thing i want you to think about with complex trauma many children from complex trauma live with the frustration that nobody ever heard them they tried to express themselves they hope their parents wanted to get them and they tried hard to engage them in conversation to talk about their world and how they see the world nobody got them nobody heard them and the only way they could get heard was to get angry and that became a big thing for them was i that i blow up before anybody listened to me anger became a necessary thing to try to get your While numerically,那个时候周科这个讲 Award needs met and to get hurt. Next thing is what we said about anger. And what I want you to see is do you see that anger's original design was to pull you in a positive direction. It was to get you to fix love violations and return relationships to healthy. Now anger pulls you in a negative direction. Do you want to know what happens now? You get angry. You want to hurt the people in your relationship. You want to destroy further the relationship. it pulls you in the opposite direction. It pulls you to do more unloving things rather than more loving things. And that is where the damage comes. Now one of the things that I ask clients all the time to be aware of is this. What is your emotional default setting? And what I mean by that is if you're not working on yourself, where do you end up emotionally? a lot of people, when they think about that, they go, if I'm not doing work on myself and not aware of myself, I end up depressed, full of anxiety and anger. And I'm dead inside otherwise. anger for most people out of complex trauma is their default setting. That's where you will gravitate. you're going to have to take a step back and look at yourself and your own self and your own self-esteem. And that's what you're going to be looking towards if you're not working on yourself. the final piece that I want you to see here is I think the greatest way to understand complex trauma is that complex trauma's greatest damage is to your identity. And we call it shame. instead of seeing yourself as valuable and a loving, valuable person, you see yourself as not valuable. Not lovable. Your identity, instead of being positive, becomes negative. And one way to understand shame is that as shame builds in your life, it requires you to be angry at yourself. Because you don't that you're unlovable. You hate that you don't have any value for who you are. Or at least that's what you think. Though that is not true. But that's what you think is true. And your anger naturally turns inwards. Because of shame and complex trauma. what I do with clients all the time is I put on the board, who are the people that you've been angry with? they'll start with partner, parents, family, friends. Then they'll go to authorities. Cops, bosses, CFS, et cetera. Then that'll go to . He's the ultimate authority. And then it'll go to self. And then they begin to realize. I'm basically mad at everything. That's what my world has become. I'm mad at me, I'm mad at the world, and everything in it. And that is a very sad place to live.