instead of getting down on yourself for procrastinating and trying to resolve it by ramping up discipline and ramping up motivation it's best to begin by understanding why the brain had to use procrastination to protect the child now I want to just lay out how I want to approach this topic because many when they approach this topic I think approach it in ways that really don't work for people with complex trauma many approach procrastination and just see it as a character flaw that they need to overcome what tools do I need to just get over this character flaw and they're judging themselves they're seeing it very negatively as a bad thing and they go to many therapists and self-help books and the approach that is used often doesn't work with people from complex trauma it gives a lot of helpful advice but it doesn't produce lasting change for people from complex trauma because it doesn't get to the crux of the matter the focus is becoming motivated getting organized accountability having a to-do list increasing your self-discipline rallying support for you how to make good decisions think positively it's really focused on that area of changing behaviors and that usually doesn't work and it's really important I think to deal with this correctly is to understand that the brain actually developed the strategy of procrastination to protect a little child it was their only tool to protect this child from getting hurt and if you look at it as initially being not a flaw but a thing that the brain was doing to try to protect the child instead of getting down on yourself for procrastinating and trying to resolve it by ramping up discipline and ramping up motivation it's best to begin by understanding why the brain had to use procrastination to protect the child we really have to deal with it on two levels you got to deal with practical stuff in the here and now but you got to deal with that wounded child why did that brain develop procrastination as a way to protect that child but before we get to that let me start with two important things that you need to make a distinction between most only see procrastination in negative light as something that is unhealthy but I think there's actually two times in our life when procrastination presents itself as actually something healthy something we need to pay attention to number one if you are exhausted if you've been pushing yourself too hard if you have not been doing proper self-care meeting your 12 needs in a healthy way you're going to be burning yourself out you're going to be burning yourself out now when you have a new responsibility your brain is going to go I can't do this I don't have the energy to do this I want to procrastinate it is trying to send you a warning sign it is trying to tell you're overwhelmed you're exhausted you need to rest you don't need to be thinking about more responsibilities you need to be thinking about health healthy self-care and if you're finding yourself wanting to procrastinate again ask yourself is this an unhealthy thing where I'm sliding into old behaviors for the wrong reasons or is this actually my body sending me a healthy message saying you're exhausted you need self-care second thing is that most of us when we are faced with a new responsibility some times what we mean by that is that most of us when we are faced with a new responsibility sometimes when some things we get up to predict things sometimes will come to our minute when many of us react as if we might tell you something is wrong today let your anxiety break up and in or process the anxiety sets start flat let's come into the know now or someone needs some other option other thing that needs support bit more knowing there's still valuable time 선택ри ogis another thing that needs care in general is being partake in self-care is it healthyメニet is which applies to your laziness ego and jokes even those that they are needed to perfect your life my face with a new responsibility, sometimes it would be very unhealthy to just take on that responsibility away without having thought it through carefully. We need to be able to give ourselves time, especially if it's a big responsibility, to go, what steps would be involved to accomplish this? What resources would that require? Will I need to involve others? Do I have the time and the strength now to do all of this stuff? Those are important questions. the danger for many people who've been procrastinating is to think, I just got to start a task away, but they haven't thought it through. They get into the task, they realize, oh, this is too much. I don't have the time or the energy, and then they quit. Then they beat themselves up for quitting. And there's a healthy planning stage, in most important decisions, that isn't procrastination. That's actually taking the necessary time to plan carefully. let's look at dealing with the wounds from the past and the deep fears that those wounds have created as one aspect of healing procrastination. think back, first of all, to the past and the future. Think back to your earliest memory you have of when you procrastinated. If you're able to connect to that memory, ask yourself what you were feeling as a child at that time, why your brain felt it needed to procrastinate. And usually you're going to find there was some fear. find out what that fear was about. Was it a fear of punishment? Was it a fear of failure? Was it a fear of being rejected, laughed at? Look at what that fear was. What you can also do when you're there in that memory is just ask, are there any body sensations that I'm experiencing now that might accompany that memory? Often people will feel something in their gut or their throat or their chest area. They'll have trouble breathing. They'll feel kind of an increase of heat in their face. Check out body sensations. Then go to, what did that little child need at that time to help them face that fear? Did they just need encouragement? Did they need somebody to teach them? Did they need somebody to show them how to do it? Did they need to be able to do something and fail and not get criticized? What did that child need? Then comfort that child. Assure that child. But then go, probably that's the fear I'm facing today. get into your cortex and go, what do I need to give myself today? Maybe I need to learn some tools here that I don't have. Maybe I need encouragement from somebody else. Maybe I need support from somebody else. Figure out what do I need today? And there's no shame in that. There's no judgment in that. You are trying to give to yourself. Now, the things that weren't given to you as a child. Now, you may initially need a mentor or a therapist to help you go through this process of understanding why procrastination was developed by your brain as a child to protect you and to help you begin to know how to help that little child, which means helping yourself today. don't be afraid to ask for a therapist or a mentor to help you with this. Let me go to practical tools for today. you've brought healing to the little child, but now you've created, you got the bad habit to deal with. You've got to overcome the inertia of years of doing it this way. What are some practical things you can do to help yourself break this procrastination behavior? Here's some of the things that helped me. Break a big task down into little tasks. if I got to get a little bit of work done, I'm going to get this big task done. That just feels overwhelming. break it down into 50 little steps. I could do this today, that tomorrow, that tomorrow. And over the period of a week, I'm going to get the task done. break big tasks down into little tasks. Don't be afraid to reward yourself. If I accomplish this, then I am going to reward myself with something I really . That's what we do for a child. If you do this, I'll take you out for ice cream. Reward yourself with something you really . That's what we do for a child. If you do this, our limbic brain still needs those along the way. And then don't necessarily just wait to the end or the completion of the project to give yourself a reward. It's to give yourself rewards along the way. Oh, I got these steps done. Let's have a reward. we need that positive encouragement of rewards. And that doesn't mean I'm weak. That doesn't mean I'm a failure. That's just how we work. And it's to do that. And I'm not saying that I'm not a failure. I'm not saying that I'm going to get there. I'm not going to get there. I'm going to get there. I'm going to get there. Some people, what they have to do is begin to learn to do the thing I least want to do first. I'm not going to put it off and do more enjoyable tasks first, and then never get around to that. I need to get what I least want to do done off. Second, some people, if they're going to say, I'm going to start this job. They need a 10 minute, we call it 10 minute technique to warm up to the job where they do little activities. They do some yoga. They listen to some music. They get themselves into a good headspace. And allow yourself, if you need it, a 10 minute, 15 minute window to kind of get yourself into the mood. Some people, they need to change their environment. I need to write this letter. I need to get this project done. I can't do it sitting in my office or sitting in my living room. I need to find a different place and change it up. And that often helps them get started. Another thing that people can do is to say, I am not going to start this task and stick at it for three hours until it's done. That's just too much for me. I'm going to break it into 30 minute windows, 30 minute blocks, and then it will be done. But I'm not going to overwhelm myself with the whole project. Some people find it helpful to just put it on the calendar. I am going to start this job at this time. Then they make themselves accountable to a friend. But having it that start time on the calendar is important for them. Another thing is I have asked myself, when am I most motivated to do hard work? And that's usually for me, and it's going to be different for everybody. But it's the earlier in the morning, the better. And often it's a certain day of the week or on the weekend when I am just kind of in my prime energy place. , let's do the hardest jobs in my prime energy place. learn that about yourself. Another thing that's helpful for many people is to make to-do lists, but it's kind of two lists. What do I need to get done over the week? what are my weekly responsibilities? How much free time do I have? And then based on that, I make a daily list. , here's what I got done today. Here's where I can fit in this extra job. those lists are very helpful for people. Another thing that can be helpful is do it with a friend. If you're just finding it impossible to get motivated to do it on your own, ask a friend. Would you come over and just help me as I do this project? Just be with me as I do this project. That can often provide some great motivation. Another thing, be accountable. Tell your friend, I'm going to be doing this job today. Check in with me tomorrow just to make sure I've done it. And that just provides a little bit of extra motivation. Play the tape to the end. Just get out of that limbic brain, which is procrastination, is I want to avoid, avoid, avoid. This is too much, too much. I'm feeling stressed, overwhelmed. Get back to your cortex and go, if I don't do this, here's the consequences. If I force myself somehow, find a way to do it, I am going to be thankful. It's going to be such a relief of stress. It's going to be way better feeling than instant gratification now beating myself up later. you have to learn what works for you. And it's going to take some time to figure out kind of what helps me get jobs done properly. There's always going to be an element of, I got to get out of my limbic brain, get into my cortex, do this, even though I don't enjoy it, don't feel it, but it's got to be done. And I'm going to do it anyways, regardless of what my limbic brain says. I hope that helps you with procrastination stuff. many of you struggle with procrastination. I hope you found this helpful. If you want to get started, please subscribe to my channel. I'll see you in the next video. Bye. many of you struggle, you beat yourself up. Start with healing that wounded child, understanding why that child procrastinated. Deal with that and then learn some of the practical tools.