last week we started a new series on relationships and I told you the reason I was doing it is because over my last 15 years and addictions counseling what I've seen is relationships have led to more relapses probably than anything and part of the problem is that people coming into recovery have lots of needs that weren't ever met in a healthy way and loneliness and a desire to be loved is one of those big needs what they don't really realize is that they get attracted still to very unhealthy people and before they know it they're in a bad relationship and it leads to a relapse and then for people who really want to grow and get healthy they begin to realize that they don't have very good tools to help them get through that and that's why I'm talking about the tools when it comes to a healthy relationship part of recovery is really learning about relationships what healthy relationships are what are tools for dealing with conflict getting to know people etc last week I just laid out a very foundational thing on the four different levels of relationship and the five different levels of communication and intimacy tonight I want to just take that a little bit and share it with you guys and I'm going to break it down a little bit further and what I want you to understand is when you come out of complex trauma you develop ways of relating to survive and those kept you safe the ways you learn to relate but what you find is as you get older they don't work anymore but it's important to go back and really understand your relationship style and what it means for you that is a why you relate the way you relate. And that is what I want to do tonight. And for most people, what the research has shown is when children grow up in complex trauma, it's very consistent that they will adopt a certain pattern. Now, there's different patterns. Different people choose different patterns. But I want to start laying some of that out. But just to give you a wee bit of background, when we talk about complex trauma, one of the terms that I use regularly is a dysfunctional family. And I have had many, many hundreds of people say to me, everybody's got a dysfunctional family. We are dysfunctional. And what goes on in their mind is this distinction that goes, the only other option to dysfunction is perfect. nobody's got a perfect family, we're all dysfunctional. And that seems to make sense. But it really. It really misses an important piece. And that is dysfunctional, the opposite isn't perfect, the opposite is functional. But what does that mean? the word dis for dysfunctional actually means in pain. And what we mean when we say a dysfunctional family, it's a family that's in pain and a family that can't resolve pain. let me broaden that for you. All families go through pain. All families have hard times. All families have bad things that happen. A functional family is able to deal with those things, resolve it, and come out the better for it. there are functional families. to be a functional family doesn't mean you never go through hard times. All families do. What makes it. What makes it a dysfunctional family is it can't resolve that pain. And the members of the family live in unresolved pain, which leads to the piling up of pain. And that is the reality of a dysfunctional family. And what we're going to see as we go into this is that children growing up in pain, they are not going to be able to resolve that pain. They begin to go in their mind, what do I need to do? And they have three different priorities in their mind. What do I need to do is in how I relate that I don't get hurt again? Secondly, what can I do as a kid that will help this family in pain? And thirdly, how do I get my needs met in this family that is in a lot of pain? And that's where the roles come into play. Now over the next couple of weeks, we're going to look at a variety of roles that family members adopt. Children, mom, dad, and there's quite a number. Tonight we're going to look at two, but what I want you to understand up front is that you as a child might have tried several different roles before you found one. And that's where the roles come into play. And that's where the roles come into play. That you , that suited you, and that became your style of relating. Now what I want you to understand as far as where you're at today is that when you get into a relationship, you will gravitate towards a relationship where you can slide back into that role. Because you're comfortable with it, how to do it, but when you slide back into that role, you're not going to be able to do it. But when you slide back into that role, that relationship won't be healthy. And for you to grow, you need to understand your style, and then you need to understand how to change that style to a healthier style. Now let me say this, that role as a child seemed to be a good role. It seemed to work. And that's why you kept doing it. And your brain in some place, is thinking today, it still might work today. But that role didn't work very . And in an adult relationship, it will always create problems and result in an unhealthy relationship. tonight we're only going to look at two roles. Many people have heard about these roles. What I have found is that most people haven't heard about them as a result of complex trauma. And they don't understand how complex trauma plays into it, both as a child and where you're at today. the first role is the hero. Or some would refer to it as the perfect child or the angel. And they are the child that is the super responsible, the most capable child. They overachieve. They're usually perfectionists, people pleasers. They're very organized. they're very good at their role of basically taking on lots of responsibilities within the family that people don't get as mad as much as they would otherwise. And they go into that. And they do it and they stick with it because they have the skill set to be very organized and to do things very . Now, here's what their thinking is. If I am the perfect child, then I won't cause mom and dad problems. they won't have more hassles to deal with because we got a lot of hassles in this family. And I will take the load off of them by doing extra responsibilities. that will enable them to cope better. That's what they're hoping. And I will help them and I will make this family better. And that is their hope. And they set about to be this perfect child. Now, what I want you to see as we go through these is why the parents these roles. why do they the hero child? Because now they can go to all their friends and they can say, hey, this child proves we're good parents. This child proves we're healthy. This child proves we have a great family. Because this child is our trophy. And we're going to show them off to everybody because it makes us look good. And that is why they love it. And the child loves it because now they're being validated. They're being shown off. And they just soak it up. But problems happen when this child reaches adulthood. Now, I've worked with enough people over the years to know that there's a very good chance that many of you here tonight were the hero child and you still easily slide into that role. But here's what begins to happen. In that adult person, the hero child has all the results of complex trauma, which is shame. deep down, they feel inadequate. Deep down, they don't feel good. They don't feel they're good enough. But they've never looked at it. They've never dealt with it. Because their priority has been performing perfection. And now in adult life, they still don't look at it. But because they're very capable, they put all their energy into performance, to doing work, signing up for the latest committee, etc. And all of that, they do stuff, they do stuff, and their focus becomes image. I can't fix my internal, is their thinking. I can't fix that shame. let's build a perfect house of cards where I do everything perfectly on the outside. And some go even beyond just performing lots of activity to having the perfect body, to having a house that's always neat, to having kids that are always dressed up and in sports, and high achievers. Everything becomes about looking good. And as they do that, and most are able to do it for a while, people applaud them. People say, Wow, I wish I could be you. You have your act together. And it just feeds their shame, they think is a solution to it, and they feed off of it. And in their own mind, they can lie to themselves, and they say, I must have my act together, because look how I'm performing. But, people then say, will you do this? You're good. And they take on more stuff, because they're afraid to say no. They're a people pleaser. And they take on more stuff, and they're this workaholic person. And as that has happened, they start to feel themselves burning out. Then they start to resent people who expect them to do much. And they're getting angry on the inside, and tired, and burnt out, and they feel themselves heading towards a collapse, or a breakdown. And that's where many who are in recovery say, I need a relapse to have a holiday. The problem is, once they have their relapse holiday, they come back into recovery, and they're still afraid to look at themselves. And they say, let's rev the motor back up again, and let's start going to all kinds of meetings, and doing all kinds of service work, and doing all of this stuff. And they rebuild their house of cards. Everybody loves them again, and everybody wants to be them, but everybody asks them to do more and more, and they burn out again. And , they begin to have problems. And then in a relationship, they start to feel they're not doing enough. And then in a relationship, their children are mad because they're never home, their partner's mad because they're never home, and when they are home, they're exhausted. And everybody suffers in the family, but everybody outside the family gets the best them. And the kids and the partner now have resentments towards them. There's a lot of conflict and anger about their schedule, etc. what this person has to do to maintain this, which works against them, is they want a house of cards, they want people admiring them, but they don't want people to get to know them. Because then they'll see how screwed up they are. they've got to keep a lot of walls up, and a lot of masks on, they don't have any satisfying relationships. Then they have to bring their children home, they realize that if I feel emotions mess up life they complicate life I can perform better when I shut emotions down they try to become a non feeling highly productive robot and that is not good especially in recovery and wanting to get healthy then because everything is tied up in what they do they are hypersensitive to any criticism and they walk around in fear that somebody will see the cracks that are forming around this perfect world that they've created fear hypersensitivity increasing tiredness tiredness is all there. And then another problem they have is in order to be this perfect person on the outside, they take on projects called needy people. And they're picking up all these needy people, and for a while it feeds their ego, but after a while it burns them out even worse. Now they come into recovery. Let's say they come to react or finding freedom. And I say, let's forget about doing. You got to look at your shame. They don't know what to do with that. And it gets them confused because their whole life has been about the outside, the externals. And they are the type of people that say, I don't need to look at that stuff. Just tell me what to do and I'll do it. And I'll say, I'll tell you what to do. Look at that stuff. And they don't want to go there because there's a huge fear that if they start looking at how broken they are, that they will just melt in a puddle of tears and depression and it'll be too much. And what I always say to them is this. It's going to hurt to go there, but we'll walk with you through it. And once you go through the beginning of it, you'll start to heal and grow. And pretty soon you'll be happy you went there because you'll be getting healthy on the inside. But it is super, super scary. But I say to them, you can keep doing what you're doing, but you're going to be on a relapse cycle for the rest of your life. And you're never going to have a happy family. You're never going to have a healthy relationship. And you're always going to get more resentments and more anger and more burnt out. it's your choice. You can keep doing what you're doing, but I think you can play that tape out to the end or you can take on your fear and risk starting to heal on the inside. that's the hero. Now the second one, the scapegoat. Most addicts at some time have felt the scapegoat. And that is also called the problem child. let me explain that. In a family of complex trauma, a dysfunctional family, there's the one child that's referred to as the troublemaker. They're the ones that. That's defiant, rebellious, angry all the time. And he just won't get with the program and smarten up. Now let me say this up front. Of all the roles that we're going to look at, the problem child is the one person in the family that is being honest. Everybody else is lying, both to each other and to. To themselves. What is going on in the scapegoat or the problem child is they're saying this. This family is sick. And I'm not going to lie about that. We're messed up. And everybody walks around we love each other and all our needs are being met. , they're not. And I'm pissed off about it. And I'm not going to go along with it. I'm rebelling. Now what. Whatever. What I want you to get is this. Their rebellion is actually a healthy thing. Because they're saying, I don't want a house of lies where we abuse and hurt each other. I refuse to go along with that. I rebel against what's happening here. Now that's how it starts. A good rebellion. The problem is it goes into a bad. Rebellion as . But that's what it begins. Now, that's what's going on in the child. Now, here's why the parents the scapegoat. Now, when people say, you seem to have trouble in your family. They go, look at our hero child. We're good parents. The reason we're having trouble is because of this child. He's the problem. And that's why he's called the scapegoat. He is blamed for all the problems in the family, in the marriage. And what the parents basically communicate is this. If we didn't have this child, we wouldn't have any problems in our family. It all gets pinned on that child. they're actually quite happy to have this child. Because. Because. They got somebody to. Blame for their stuff. And they don't want to look at their stuff. they have a scapegoat to put it on. that then results in this problem child getting blamed for everything. And more stuff gets piled on them all the time. Now, a couple other things are happening with the scapegoat. The scapegoat. Becomes the honest expression of how everybody's really feeling but afraid to show. when he rebels and he gets angry and he lashes out and he speaks his mind to mom and dad, he's really giving a voice to everybody. They won't admit it, but that they're almost thankful for. But then what happens with this scapegoat? Is they're really ostracized by the family. The family says you're the problem and they kind of feel a black sheep. They don't fit. They don't belong in this family because they refuse to play by the rules of this family. And they feel an outsider and outcast. And I suspect all of you have been through some of that. that's as a child. Now let me show you what happens as they get older into adult life. I find it interesting in working with scapegoats or problem child people all the time is that most were extremely sensitive children. That's what clued them in that this family's got problems. Because they got hurt much. And they weren't prepared. They weren't prepared to tolerate it or turn a blind eye. But in order to survive they had to rebel. And in order to rebel they had to harden their heart and harden their skin and shut down their sensitivity. And what begins to happen in a problem child as they get into their teens is they try not to feel anything at all. And they shut everything down. Now that will become problems for them later in life. They will have to relearn how to feel emotions. They will have to really enter into scary territory. that's the first problem. The next one, part of their rebellion in their teens is they started getting applause from other kids for being scared. They started getting applause from other kids for being a bad boy. And they said, wow, here's how I get my validation. I can't be validated in my family because the hero gets all the validation. I will get validation from being a bad boy. And they tried to be the baddest of the bad. And what often happened is they felt in order to get new validation, they had to keep pushing the envelope. last time they drank a whole 12 pack at a party. Tonight they're drinking a 2-4 at a party. And everybody's going to talk about how drunk they got. And then they push and push always a new way of rebelling against the system. And that can be a problem. And then as soon as somebody says, who's in authority, I want you to do this, they've trained themselves to do the opposite. And in a relationship, if their partner said, could you do this for me? They just get their back up. And they don't want to do that for them. And to have a relationship, they're going to have to look at that rebellious knee-jerk reaction that is part of how they train themselves to respond to authority and to rules. And then much of what they learn to do in their rebellion is to manipulate people, to intimidate people. they got what they want, but people don't see them as safe. People see them as a bit of a danger, a loose cannon. As a person who couldn't be trusted. A person that's just got too many anger issues. And they struggle with all of that. And the problem child, it started out really good. They refused to accept a sick situation. But what happened is they, in order to maintain that role, had to get sicker and sicker themselves. They don't realize how sick they had to become. And now when they come into adult life, they're going to still find people who pat them on the back for being a bad boy and pushing the envelope. But if they're going to get healthy and have healthy relationships, they've got to be able to let that bad boy go. Now here's a challenge that many have. They go, if I let go of the bad boy, then who am I? I don't want to become a weak, little, mushy, sensitive person again that's going to get walked all over and hurt. And to give up a role, either the hero or the problem child, the scapegoat, there's a fear. A fear that if I drop this role, will I get hurt again? Will I get my needs met again? What will happen? And for the scapegoat, the hero, yes, there's fear. But you're never going to get healthy unless you walk through it. And that's what we're about is helping people walk through that and begin to change. that they can have meaningful relationships today. Let me say one final thing about the problem child, the bad boy. I find that, let's say you were a bad girl, ? Isn't it interesting how bad girls are attracted to bad boys? And guess what happens in recovery? Bad girls, they're prepared to give up being a bad girl, but for some reason they're still attracted to bad boys. That's a recipe for disaster. if that is your pattern, you're going to have to look at that piece as . , that's two today. last week we talked about ' first and called the Beatitudes. we looked at are the poor in spirit. And what we saw is that he was giving us a recipe for a healthy life, a satisfying life, how to find peace and contentment. And it basically sounded a contradiction, a total paradox. to be happy, you have to be poor in spirit. You got to mourn. You got to be meek. And what we saw is that it presented a parallel to the 12 steps, and they were based on the Beatitudes. And is saying, you can't do it on your own. There's something broken inside. And you have to go there and with 's help and then surrender. And we use that meekness, the little jockey on a horse. I got thinking about all of that. And I got thinking, there's actually a part of the that gives us a word picture of what taught. And it is Psalm 23. And if you're familiar with the , Psalm 23 is, The is my shepherd, I shall not want. He makes me lie down in green pastures. He leads me beside quiet waters. He restores my soul. And then the verse that's used at many funerals, even though I'm walking in the streets, walking through the valley of the shadow of death, I will not be afraid for you're with me, your rod and your staff, they comfort me. And why that ties in with the Beatitudes is because what David is saying, then David was the writer, and he was a shepherd boy when he was a young man. And as he looked at sheep every day, he thought, boy, there, people are a lot sheep. And what he really meant was, children are a lot sheep. And we said last week that children operate out of the limbic part of their brain, the emotional part. They make decisions based on how they feel or will it make me feel good. Complex trauma, people are children that never grew up emotionally. They're still stuck in the limbic part of their brain. And what David is saying is complex trauma people are very much sheep. And that is what I want to show you tonight. And then that ties in with why said, you need to be broken, you need to be surrendered. That's what sheep have to do. Because sheep cannot survive without a shepherd. Do you realize that sheep is the only animal in the world that cannot survive in the wild by itself? Sheep are their own worst enemy. And if left to themselves, they will promptly destroy themselves. let me help you understand a bit about sheep. And then maybe you'll understand yourself as a child and how you might feel today. number one, sheep can't survive in the wild because they are defenseless. you think about it, sheep don't have sharp claws. They can't fight. They're slow. And with all that wool on them, they're even slower. they can't run for their life. They don't have sharp teeth or fangs. And they're not very strong. they're useless when it comes to protecting themselves. They can't do that. Because of that, sheep are creatures controlled by fear. They are afraid of almost everything. If they're in a new situation, unknown to them, they're afraid. Sound you? Fear of the unknown. Fear of change. If there's conflict in the herd, they're full of fear. And a sheep, if they have any fear at all, they can't lie down and relax and they won't eat. They will just sit there in an anxiety state. And they won't be able to lie down or eat until they feel safe. If they see a predator, then they are full of fear. They can't lie down or eat. And if they can't see their shepherd, if they feel abandoned or rejected or out of touch, they're full of fear. Very much a child and a complex trauma person. Because of that, they have a very difficult time trusting. sheep will always think they're smarter than the shepherd. They will always think the grass is greener on the other side of the fence. And they just have a great deal of time, hard time trusting, much you. Then they're extremely stubborn. And complex trauma creates a stubbornness. And if you have a stubborn personality and add complex trauma, you are super stubborn. And nobody being around you when you're in the stubborn zone. Because you can't be reasoned with. That's the way a sheep is. And then sheep live by a mob instinct. if one sheep claims to be the leader, and they start running over a cliff, all the sheep will follow them. They just go and follow the leader. Much people from complex trauma. And the sad part is sheep are one of the dumbest creatures around. when you put sheep in a field, they won't just eat the top of the grass, they'll eat the roots too. they'll destroy a field in no time, and pretty soon they won't have anything to eat. And then a sheep will eat dirty water, poisoned water, poisoned plants. They don't check anything out. They don't know how to check things out. And you leave them by themselves, they're dead in no time at all. And what David is emphasizing, and it's what was emphasizing, we can't survive on our own. We're our own worst enemy. We need a shepherd that we surrender to. let me just walk you through a little bit in the Psalms. it starts out, He makes me lie down in green pastures. He leads me beside still waters. two things David wants us to see. It's the same thing. He is saying, or the is my shepherd. I have the best shepherd in the world. I have the only shepherd that knows what is best for me and wants what is best for me and can make it happen. He gives me green grass, not dried, brown, burnt grass. He provides me with the best grass and He makes it I can lie down. In other words, He helps me deal with my fear that I can relax. Now, let me say this. That, David didn't write this the first day of having as a shepherd. He wrote this at the end of his life. After he had gradually learned to trust and now looking back, I think he's saying, I wish I had trusted Him sooner. I wish it hadn't taken me long because He is a good shepherd. And then it says, He leads me beside quiet waters. That's significant. A sheep's fear is great that it won't drink from a rushing stream. If the water's moving, it freaks the sheep out. It thinks it's dangerous. And it won't drink even though it's super thirsty. what does a shepherd do if he doesn't have a to draw from and put it in a trough? Or if there's not a quiet pond, if there's only a stream, he will take the time to get a bunch of rocks and put them across the stream or halfway across to make a little dam that behind the rocks is a quiet stream and behind the rocks is a quiet little pool of water. And the rushing water can go around the outside but the sheep will then drink because He's created some quiet water. this is a shepherd who knows the sheep intimately. He knows how they click. He knows how they're wired. He knows their fears. He knows what they need. And He takes all of that into account. That's what David's wanting to say about his shepherd. Then it says that He guides me in a righteous path. He is a reliable guide. Then the next one I love. It says He restores my soul. That is super significant. Sheep have a problem. They grow all this wool. And farmers love it and they make clothes from it and it's a great source of income. But what happens before the sheep get sheared is in those final weeks before they get a shave, they got much wool that often when they lay down, if it's on a little bit of a slope, they will flop onto their back because the wool weighs much. And then once they're on their back, it's a turtle. They can't get back on their feet. And the shepherd's term for that is that they are cast down. Now what is significant is this. If they're in that cast down position, they start to panic. And if the shepherd doesn't get them within a half an hour and stand them back on their feet, they will die of panic. That is how bad it is. Now David wrote another Psalm, Psalm 42 and Psalm 43, and he starts both Psalms by saying this, Why are you cast down, O my soul? What is he saying? He's saying as I do my journal today, I am in a panic stage. I am a sheep on his back that feels hopeless. And I am about to die. And I am ready to give up hope. Why? What is going on? And then he says this, Hope in , and you will yet praise him. David was saying, I at times am a sheep when I get super depressed and I begin to feel hopeless and I start to despair. That's when I need my shepherd. Now there's a second way that a shepherd restores the soul. the first is, when I'm that hopeless cast down state, he restores my soul by giving me hope, by standing me on my feet again. There's a second time when a sheep will lose hope. That's in the hot dry summer. In a time of drought. you can imagine they're out on a mountain, and they're going from pasture field to pasture field, no grass, no grass. And they're carrying all this wool, they're hot, they're thirsty, they're getting discouraged, and they're getting to feel hopeless. Their soul is cast down. Where does a shepherd take that worn out, exhausted, thirsty, cast down sheep? To a valley. You realize water always goes to the lowest point. even where there's a hot summer or a drought, where can you find water for your sheep? In a valley. But what does he go on in the next verse to say? That the valleys are dark. Sheep don't valleys. Valleys are scary places because there's shadows in valleys. You lose the sun more quickly in valleys. And that was a mountainous territory. And what does say to us? Do you realize mountain tops are great? But you can't grow anything on a mountain top. Where do you grow stuff? In a valley. Where do you find water? In a valley. Where do you take a person when they're not, they're messed up in their life, and they're losing hope? Guess what does? He takes us to a dark place, where it's a valley, where we say, I need you. And then he says, now this valley will become not just a problem area, a scary area, it will become a place that restores your soul, because now I'm going to feed you. And now you're going to get some water. sometimes the most difficult, darkest times in our life, we hate and we say, what are you doing? He's saying, I'm bringing you to a valley to restore your soul. I don't know if you've gone through that, but I sure have on many occasions. And when I go into a valley, I say, you're a bad shepherd. I don't you now. We are not on speaking terms. And he says, hang around. And after a while, I surrender. And that valley, which I thought would destroy me, fed me. And it made me stronger and it restored my soul. let me go on to the next one. Even though I walked through a valley of the shadow of death. And what that means is, it was the deepest, darkest valley. It was the worst valley. It was a valley that felt scary that the sheep went in there a good, calm, sex trauma person with a worst case scenario going, I'm gonna die. That's where they went in their thinking. And again, you go, I don't my shepherd. I don't think he's a good guide. And sometimes 's guidance in our life seems wrong or very confusing. And seems a little bit cruel. But says, just wait a while. Hang in there. And again, if there's no pasture anywhere else, you go to a valley. Now here's what does. A shepherd had two instruments that they carry. Rod and a staff. And a rod was a little billy club. And it was a short thing that the shepherd would use as a weapon to protect against wild animals. He would put a rod on the sheep. He would use it to give the sheep a little smack if they needed it, some discipline. And he would use it just to count the sheep. But that's not the main thing that he uses in the valley. He uses this big, long staff with a hook in the end. And the point is this. What would happen as they go through that dark valley is the sheep would start to get afraid. And they go, I can't see my shepherd. It's too dark in here. the shepherd would take that long staff and just place it touched the sheep's side. And what the shepherd was doing was saying this. You can't see me, but you can feel that I'm here. I'm giving you a little reminder of my presence. And as soon as the sheep felt that staff touch their side, they would relax. The shepherd's here. He hasn't abandoned me. He knows I'm here. He can see me. Even though I can't see him, I have a good shepherd. Now there's one other thing I want you to notice. It started out, the is my shepherd. I shall not want. He makes me. Now if you remember grammar in school, that was third person. He makes me lie down in green pastures. He leads me beside still waters. He restores my soul. He guides me on a righteous path. Then it says, even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are with me. He doesn't say, for he is with me. Guess what happens in a valley? goes from being the distant shepherd to being your friend. You develop a relationship in valleys. And what David is saying is something very spiritual happens in a valley is you get to know . It drives you to . It makes you want a better relationship with . Do what happened if we were on mountaintops all the time? We would send a little message. He would say, I'm going to send you to a place where you can have a more peaceful life. I don't need you anymore. He would send a little note saying, I don't think I need you anymore. We wouldn't care about spending time with him because the sun's great up here. The emotions are great. The sunsets are beautiful. Who needs ? says, I think we need some time in the valley. you get to know the most important peace in your life is not mountaintops, it's me. And your relationship with me. And it's in the valley that David got to know as more than a third person shepherd. Final thing I want you to see, and I shared this a couple weeks ago. Remember, sheep are stubborn. Sheep don't trust. what happens in the early days, a sheep goes, I see that you're my shepherd. I don't trust you. I don't think you're smarter than me. And some sheep would be particularly rebellious. And they would not follow their shepherd. what a shepherd would do, not to be cruel, he would break the leg of that sheep. Then he would set it, and then he would carry that sheep on his shoulders over the next month. And I got a picture of that for you. There you go. And what would happen is that leg was healed. And what I'm feeling is every day he was close to the shepherd. Every day the shepherd would talk to him. Every day the shepherd would just chat about stuff. And pretty soon the sheep was going, I this guy. what, this guy knows what he's doing. And when it came time to take the splint off and put the sheep back on the ground, that sheep was the closest to the shepherd. He never strayed because he had gotten to know the shepherd. I think the breaking of the lamb's leg is the greatest illustration of addiction. Because what was happening in your life? You were saying F you to everybody. You were rebelling. Who needs ? Who needs anybody? I'm my own boss. I'm doing it my way. And said, I'm going to do it my way. And you're going to do it my way. Let me give you this little thing called addiction. And it's going to take you to a place where it breaks your leg. And what will happen when your leg is broken? You go, I think I need you. And , I need you to carry me. And carried you for a while. Now some of you, maybe he didn't carry you long enough. Because as soon as you got back on the ground, you said, , I'll take over again. See you later. And you have to go through that. And you have to go through that. And you have to go through a few more broken legs until finally you go, I can trust this . He knows me. He knows what's best for me. He loves me and wants what's best for me. He is a better shepherd than I am. I love my shepherd. And that is the beauty to me that addiction can be the worst thing in your life but the greatest . If it drives you to surrender to a loving shepherd. Let's .