, welcome again to another Friday night. We're continuing our series on reparenting, which is the process of healing from trauma, that we have to parent ourselves, learn to meet our own needs, learn to regulate our emotions, all kinds of things. And we've been looking at a variety of topics that we need to learn how to reparent ourselves in, because it was quite possible that we weren't parented in a healthy way in those areas as a child. And today we're coming to the big topic of sex. every parent has the responsibility of the birds and bees talks with their children, introducing their children to an understanding. Hopefully. Hopefully of healthy sexuality. But what that assumes is that when the parents give that talk to the children, that the children are totally ignorant of that area of their life, because their sex drive hasn't awakened yet. They've had no experience in that area, and they're a blank slate. And they're being taught by parents about sexuality. But one of the sad things about trauma, and complex trauma, is that. often children are exposed to sex, are sexually abused. And when the parents go to parent them in that area, the children already have a whole bunch of issues. And the parents really begin a process of trying to help them understand healthy sexuality versus unhealthy sexuality. And that is really what reparenting is for people coming out of trauma. And that is really what reparenting is for people coming out of trauma. And that is really what reparenting is for people coming out of trauma. It's helping yourself deal with some of the unhealthy sexuality that you've been exposed to. It's helping yourself deal with some of the unhealthy sexuality that you've been exposed to. that has done damage in you and wounded you. and beginning to understand what a healthy sexuality looks . And I just want to say upfront that this is a very lengthy process, of reparenting ourselves if we've come out of sexual abuse, of reparenting ourselves if we've come out of sexual abuse, of reparenting ourselves if we've come out of sexual abuse, and respect each other. and respect each other. and respect each other. And respect each other. and respect each other. and respect each other. and respect each other. and respect each other. twenty two hundred L, two, three two thousand nine hundred. abuse and dysfunction and because of that this is a talk that I have been very cautious to talk about in fact I've been spending probably over five years debating how do I give a talk on sexuality to an audience where a high percentage of the people have been sexually abused and any talk about sexual abuse is potentially triggering for them and is going to bring up a whole bunch of memories that could put them in a very bad place and I don't want to do that and what I want to say up front is the reason I am doing this talk is because we are now in a position to offer to people help online and we are announcing that through lift our online program we're going to be offering an eight-week sexual abuse support group and as I give this talk you may have to shut it shut me off because it's just triggering up too much stuff but what I want you to be able to go in your mind is say I need to go to you to be able to go in your mind is say I need to go to you to be able to go to sign up for this because there's stuff here I got to deal with or else I'm going to be in a lot of trouble and this support group is going to have a trained therapist going to have people with experience in helping others with sexual abuse issues it is going to have teaching it is going to have homework but it's going to have support group where people find a support group where people find a support group where people find a safe place to talk about this stuff if it applies to you write down this email contact at Tim Fletcher dot CA or you can go to our website and under lift we will have a place where you can sign up for this eight-week program because I don't want to stir up stuff without giving you the tools to resolve it safe place to talk about this stuff if it applies to you write down this email contact at Tim Fletcher dot CA or you can go to our website and under lift we will have a place where you can sign up for this eight-week program because I don't want to stir up stuff without giving you the tools to resolve it Now let me say this as a big picture for you. Sex was designed to be the most beautiful gift for a couple who are committed to each other. It was supposed to be a gift that adds pleasure to the relationship, that deepens the connection within the relationship. And sex is the most pleasurable human happening. It is the thing that we can do naturally that gives the greatest pleasure. And it was designed to happen within a committed relationship that it would just be a benefit to the relationship. It would add to the relationship. The problem is, whenever we as humans find ourselves in a relationship with a person and something pleasurable, food, computer games, we tend to abuse it. And when you take something that is the most pleasurable, guess what has the greatest chance of being abused? That thing. Because it's the most pleasurable. And sadly, sex which is designed to be the greatest, most beautiful pleasure, is the thing that we are most likely to abuse and cause the greatest damage. And that has happened to many people. , in thinking through this talk, I don't want to get into specifics around sexual abuse. My goal is to steer away as much as possible from stirring up memories for you. Though I realize I can't totally prevent, but my goal is two things. Number one is to help you realize that you need to reach out for help if you've never done that before. That it's too difficult to get through this stuff all by yourself. Instead, whenever you head into this topic all by yourself, it takes you further down. my goal is to get you to be motivated to realize that you need to reach out for help. my goal is to get you to be motivated to reach out for help. To do that, that's my second purpose, which is to realize how big of an issue this is. That sexual abuse is just not something you go, oh that didn't affect me. No, sexual abuse has ramifications into every area of life. It affects how we think, it affects our mental health, it affects our emotional world, it affects our physical world, it affects our relational world, it affects our marriage, it affects our parenting. And I want to lay out for you the ramifications of sexual abuse, hopefully that you go, wow, I see myself there. That just gives me the extra motivation to go and deal with this and reach out for help. I want it to be a message of motivation, but a message of hope. That there is help for people who have gone through this. just as again an introduction to understand sex. I talked about it's designed to be kind of the most beautiful thing within a committed relationship to just add beauty to that relationship. it's not the sex that makes the relationship beautiful, it's the commitment of two people who are safe, who are authentic, who are willing to help each other. Who are truly connected at a spiritual, intellectual, emotional level. And then the sex is just the cherry on top. It just adds extra beauty and connection. But understand then that there's other types of sex. the first is that soul intimacy sex. That's the ideal. That's the healthiest form of sex. But then there's a second form of sex. And what about a person who's not in a committed relationship? Who's single? They still have a sex drive. They still have testosterone and estrogen being released in their system. That's creating a desire for sex. And for them I have what I call the sex that is just the release of sexual pressure that's building up. And for some people that can be masturbation. Just to kind of release that pressure. For others that can be friends with benefits or a fuck buddy that just releases that pressure. But that is not as satisfying as the first type. But it's a release of sexual pressure. And then the third type is addiction sex. it's the person that compulsively is engaged in sex where there's not intimacy. There's not safety. It's just it goes beyond just a release of sexual pressure. It is something that they can't break. It's almost an animal sex that satisfies temporarily physically but it doesn't satisfy emotionally. It doesn't satisfy spiritually. And it becomes a prison to them. It becomes something that takes them away. It takes them into greater pain, greater emptiness. Now the problem for people with complex trauma is most have never experienced true connection, unconditional love, authenticity. they've never experienced type A. That beautiful intimate sex. all that they've been left with is kind of other forms of sex that aren't as satisfying. Then for people who end up as sex addicts, for them it's dangerous to go back to type B, those releases of just building sexual pressure because it can take them back into their addiction. And that can become a problem. And for many of them, they actually have to go to abstinence for a while because this is such a difficult area to figure out what healthy sex is. But what's really needing to happen for people is I need to figure out the difference between healthy sex and unhealthy sex. And in my own life, I need to figure out when I'm in healthy sex but then when I cross over into unhealthy sex. where's the boundary for me to be able to figure out? , I need to figure out the key between healthy sex and unhealthy sex. that is part of the journey for people. I want to begin by just giving you some 10 statistics around sexual abuse. first of all, what they've found, and this makes statistics really difficult, is that out of 100 sexual assaults, only 6 are reported as sexual assaults. that's only 6. What I want you to understand is that coming up with accurate statistics is difficult and most of the statistics are on the low side when it's probably higher. Only about 1-2 of date rape is ever reported. again, those are just to be aware of. , 60 of sexual abuse or assault victims are reported as sexual assaults. However, assault victims are under the age of 17. Over 80 of sex crimes are women. 80 of sexual assault incidents occur in the home. And that's really important to understand. 17 of girls under 16 have experienced some form of incest. Now when we come to the world of addiction and trauma, all of a sudden the numbers jump significantly. about 2 thirds of women who are addicts or with complex trauma, 2 thirds of the women have been sexually abused. And about half of men. when I'm dealing with people from complex trauma or an addiction, it's almost safe to assume that they probably have some type of sexual abuse. Half of all sexual offenders are married or in long-term relationships. this isn't necessarily something that's just done by single people. 80 of assailants are friends and family of the victim. And of the perpetrators, 75 of the perpetrators were themselves sexually abused as children. those are just sad to look at those statistics, especially when you come to look at them within the world of complex trauma and addiction. I want to go to really as early as I can in this talk to what would I say to a person who's been sexually abused as a child. And I want you to know that I have dealt with hundreds, thousands of people who've been sexually abused. Sadly, it is just way too common in my world that I work in. And I've learned that people who've been sexually abused often have trouble dealing with it because they feel guilty. And the first thing I want people who are sexually abused as children to understand is it was not your fault. Whenever you have somebody in a position of power and a child who's not in a position of power, the fault is always on the person in the position of power because they were able to make the choices. And they took advantage of you. And now, people still struggle. And what I want you to understand is the guilt that you feel is actually false guilt. You were made to feel guilty even though you weren't guilty. And part of your journey is figuring out that all this guilt you feel is actually false guilt. It was put on you by somebody else, and they have the authority to take the guilt off themselves because they are actually the guilty person. And where does the false guilt potentially come from? , the person who sexually abused you may have blamed you. They may have said, you must have wanted it because of the way you dressed. it's your fault. Or you must have wanted it because of how you talked or looked at them. No, you're an innocent child. All the fault is with them. But then, you might feel guilty because part of you enjoyed the intention that you got from them. They gave you special attention. They treated you in a special way. They gave you gifts. They gave you things. And you that. And now you feel maybe, I was wanting the sex because I liked all that attention. No, you were just learning and trying to be kind, which is built into all of us. Genuine love. They took advantage of that love. And the reason you liked the attention often was because you weren't getting the proper kind of attention you should have been getting from the other people in your life. that is not an area where you have failed. But then some people say, but I feel guilty I must have wanted it because it gave me some pleasure. I liked it, but I didn't it. I didn't part of how it made me feel, but I liked some of how it made me feel. there's an ambivalence inside of you. What I want you to understand is the pleasure part wasn't something that you created by wanting it. It's just the way your body works. That when you stimulate certain parts, there's a pleasure experience. That doesn't mean you wanted it. That means your body was just functioning the way it was designed to function. you shouldn't feel guilt for that. There's another piece around this that's connected to the guilt. And it's important to understand. Usually in childhood sexual abuse, the child is told not to say anything. They are told to carry this secret. That is a terrible burden for a child to carry. Because they're told, you're going to have to carry this secret. Because when you carry a secret, you're made to, you have an internal sense that you're being asked to protect that something is wrong. And what the perpetrator may have done to get you to carry that secret is he may have threatened you that if you don't carry that secret, he'll hurt you or hurt somebody you love. Or if you reveal that secret, you're going to ruin your dad's reputation. You're going to ruin your family. Or nobody will believe you anyways. And you carry this secret and it's a burden. It creates a shame inside of you. The truth is, you are not carrying the secret to protect yourself or your family. You're carrying the secret to protect the perpetrator. Because the perpetrator does not want to have his behavior revealed. But what I want you to understand is that to the sexual abuse, now another weight is being added and that is being threatened. Carrying a secret. The pain of feeling something's wrong here that I can't talk about. And all of that is adding stress and pain to your nervous system. One of the things that I get often in dealing with people who are, were sexually abused is that sometimes they experimented with other kids their own age. it was more than maybe playing doctor. They did things together. And now they realize that some of the people they experimented or included in their sexual activities, they ended up kind of screwed up in life. They got into drugs. They got into a lot of stuff or they committed suicide and they go, it's my fault. If I hadn't included them in my activities, they would never have turned out the way they had. it's all my fault that they're messed up. That's a terrible guilt to carry. And you have to think this through carefully. Why did you include them in your activities? What, why before the age when your sex drive was awakened, did you include them? And it's because you were exposed. , who exposed you? Isn't it maybe you? Isn't it maybe their fault? And that it's a tough one, but it's something that many people who come out of sexual abuse end up finding themselves engaged with others and their lives get messed up and they feel a ton of guilt around that. let me just for clarity's sake give a definition of sexual abuse. I want to just give a formal definition that you can get off the internet. It's basically that sexual abuse is when any person, whether a parent, caregiver, family member, teacher, family friend, babysitter, or a stranger, involves a child or young person in any kind of sexual activity. This could mean being forced or manipulated into taking part in a sexual act, inappropriate touching, or being involved in any kind of sexual behavior which may not involve touching. It could happen just once or it might happen repeatedly over a period of time. the focus of that definition is on childhood sexual abuse. Let's expand that to sexual abuse beyond childhood sexual abuse. it would be having sexual activities forced upon you, which would include improper touching, forced to have intercourse, which could be rape, oral sex, anal sex, bestiality. And what I want you to understand is that you can be married and still be sexually abused by your partner because they force you to have sex against your will, which basically they rape you. Or it can be exposure to porn, or sexual activity as a child. all of those would incorporate sexual abuse definition. Now I'm always asked, what about playing doctor? And what we're really asking there is as our sexual drive awakens, we develop a sexual curiosity to know about other people. Do they have the same parts as me? And there's that curiosity, and playing doctor is just that exploring of curiosity. Where it can cross a line into unhealthy or into sexual abuse is when that exploration becomes a regular occurrence, where I want to keep pursuing this because it's more than curiosity now, it does something in the mind. It awakens sensations inside of me. It awakens sensations inside of me that I now want to feed. And that then can turn into sexual abuse. there's more to this that I want you to understand. sexual abuse is just not restricted to the person was violated sexually. There's other dynamics that are going on. the next big dynamic is sexual abuse is always or usually always perpetrated by someone the child trusts. And what is happening there is it becomes then an extreme act of betrayal of trust, violation of trust. That is important to understand. And , when we talk about the trauma of sexual abuse, it's not just a traumatic event. That does great damage in a child's life moving forward whenever it comes to trust. Secondly, it is trauma. It is a traumatic event. And if it happens over and over again, it is a complex trauma event. And we are actually dealing with a child who's been traumatized. And that is important to understand and we'll come back to that. let me move into the ramifications around sexual abuse. Long-term ramifications that can go on for years into their adult life, into their marriages. for many there will be concerns, will be confusion that can go on for a long time that comes out of this struggle with guilt did I bring it on myself is it partly my fault maybe I enjoyed it a bit is that make it partly my fault and there's confusion around that and that can go on for a long time secondly there can be confusion around sexual identity now I want to be clear here and not misunderstood I believe that some people with male parts actually have a female orientation they're gay I have no problem with that some women with female parts actually as lesbians have a male or orientation they're born with it I have no problem with that but what I want you to understand is that some people with some men with men parts and a men at male orientation they're heterosexual due to childhood sexual abuse can get confused and they think their orientation is gay because that's what they've always felt because of the sexual abuse what I have seen in counseling is I get people who come to and their orientation they believe is gay and what I find out is as I counsel with them some are going to realize ooh sexual abuse sexual abuse as they deal with their sexual abuse they begin to go what maybe I maybe I'm heterosexual but there's a lot of confusion for a while as they sort that out whereas others know I've been born this way and I always be this way and that's both can be what happens and it's important to me for people to understand is that some people who end up gay weren't born that way that was a result of sexual abuse and that's not necessarily a big percentage but in some cases it is true there's a second long-term outcome you they have found that people with childhood sexual abuse will have increased chances of anxiety disorders in adult life they found that they will have mood swings in adult life that can be insane that can just go from very high to very low from very calm to very angry that can just be part of what they deal with in their adult life and then I said there's a lot of things that they can't do and I think that's important for us to be able to do that to be able to do and then I said there's a lot of things that they can do It's a trauma event, they will have PTSD or CPTSD to deal with in their adult life. And if it was an ongoing thing in their childhood, then complex trauma, they now have CPTSD, which means they've got 60 different characteristics that come out of complex trauma that are now going to be part of what they have to deal with in adult life. Mal-adaptations to their complex trauma that are messing up their adult life. there's a lot of 60 different things that have come out of the childhood sexual abuse that now make their adult life very difficult. Another common long-term ramification is a distorted view of sex. what happens when a drug. a human drive sex, which normally would be awakened at 10 to 12 years of age, what happens when a drive is awakened before its time? usually it can go to a hyperdrive or a totally shut off. the hyperdrive is that when you get to your teens, all of a sudden you are just focused on sex. And you become very promiscuous. Sex. For you is what life is all about. And that's what you think is going to make you happy. Or you can go the other way. You just want nothing to do with sex. Sex just triggers memories. sex you see is dirty. Sex, if you get married and all of a sudden your partner wants sex, you just freeze up. It's not something you enjoy. Or you can go through. You perform the necessary actions with your partner and try to act you enjoy it. But it's no pleasure for you. What I want you to understand from that is this. If that's the way sexual abuse has affected you, you can see that will lead to major marriage issues around the sexual part of your relationship. And I've seen many marriages fall apart because of that. Because the partner didn't deal with their sexual abuse. Another thing that can come out of that is the person then uses masturbation as their way of self-soothing. And it becomes that distorted view of sex is that sex is just about calming down, feeling better, relieving stress. It becomes just an all-out. It becomes just an all-out. It becomes just an ongoing part of their life that is used to solve all kinds of emotional problems. Then for some, their distorted view of sex is sex was their way of getting attention. , if men want me because of sex and they have lots of shame where they naturally don't themselves or feel very valuable, then they go, I'll be flirtatious. I'll be good and bad. Because that gets me attention and that makes me feel good. Or for others, what they realize is if they're very sexual and good at that, it gives them power over the other person. The other person is putty in their hands and they that feeling of power. And for them, sex is power. Others can go to the very extreme where now sex is all they think about. Everything is sexualized. Whatever anybody says, it just brings up sexual connotations. Every person they meet, they undress them in their mind. They see them sexualized. Sex just takes over their life. Another thing that can happen for some people is that they develop a distorted view of the opposite sex. if you're sexually abused by a man and you're a woman, sometimes it's very easy to begin to think that all men are dirty, that all men want is sex. And if you've been sexually abused by several different men, it's very easy to begin to think that way. And that can cause you problems in adult life or in a marriage because what happens is you love and hate men at the same time. And that gets in the way of true healthy intimacy. But there's a third distortion that can come out of sexual abuse and that's a distorted view of yourself. you begin to see yourself as dirty, as used good. It has a lot of shame for you. And you go, who would ever want me? I'm used goods. I'm dirty. Or for some, sex is what made you feel you had value, your body. People wanted your body. And sex for you is what gave you value, made you feel worthwhile. And you see yourself primarily as a sexual being. You don't see yourself accurately. You don't see yourself as having value outside of sex. It's all tied up with sex, which is a distorted view of self. And that has tragic consequences. And then another one for many people is trust issues. if the people that committed the sexual abuse to you were people you trusted and therefore there was a betrayal, a violation of trust, now you have trouble trusting again. Anybody. And if somebody's nice to you, that just gets you on guard. What do they want? Are they grooming me? And if somebody's in authority, you go, I'm not sure I can trust authorities because they always seem to abuse power. trust gets interrupted and affected. But then there's all kinds of triggers that can happen for people with sexual abuse. now watching certain movies can trigger you. Just participating in healthy sex can trigger a whole bunch of memories and put you in a bad place. Seeing certain people can trigger you. Going certain places can trigger you. Even somebody coming up beside you and touching you. Not in a sexual way, but just that touch triggers you. Certain gestures that people make, certain sounds, certain smells, all can trigger you. And then another long-term ramification is that guilt piece. But then a huge one, and I think most people don't understand how big this is, is the shame. That I'm not good enough. Something's wrong with me. I don't have value outside of my sexual identity. Shame consequences that come out of sexual abuse are massive. And then, for some, they dissociate. during the sexual abuse, they detach from their body. They dissociate it. they had an out-of-body experience. They went to a fantasy land. They just became catatonic. But what can happen moving forward is they become just good at dissociating from uncomfortable emotions. Disconnecting from how they're feeling. Escaping to fantasy land. They don't really want to deal with anything. the thing, the dissociation that enabled them to survive now has become problematic in a healthy life as an adult. Many that come out of sexual abuse have a distorted view of love. They see love only in terms of sex. They don't understand love outside of sex. Or they see love as selfishness. Because the person that was sexually abusing them was saying, I love you. But now they see that person was just being selfish. maybe love is just selfishly getting what you want. there's distortions there. And I think you're beginning to see that sexual abuse in childhood causes issues, big issues in adult relationships. because there's the fear of getting hurt again and trusting, there's walls. There's a failure or a fear of opening up, a fear of intimacy, of letting them get too close, of letting them get to know me. And that can cause all kinds of problems. But then some people, they then see sex as basically the main tool of trying to keep the relationship. And they think, I'm going to try to keep the relationship healthy. if there's conflict, let's just have sex. That's their way of resolving it. If I feel you're drifting apart a little bit, instead of talking about it, let's just have sex. sex was the glue that brought us together because we were attracted sexually. Now let's use sex as the glue that keeps us together. whenever there's a problem in the relationship, let's just have sex. you're putting the health of the relationship, all the weight is now put on sex. And that's too much weight for sex to bear. Then some people come in and go, sex is the way to manipulate my partner to get me what you want. if you want sex with me tonight, then you have to do this for me. Or if my partner's thinking of leaving me, sex is the way of keeping them from leaving me I'll never get abandoned. sex becomes a manipulation thing within a relationship. But then sex is the way to get me out of it. And sadly, what we have found is people who've been sexually abused or traumatized, they tend to be attracted to abusive people. People that will abuse them again. Because that was their normal. That's kind of how they knew how to relate. There's something in them drawn to that. And they have a greater chance of being abused again. And then, what happens from there? And then, what happens from there? And then, what happens from there? For many people with sexual abuse is they end up with behaviors in their relationships that get diagnosed as borderline personality. And we're going to look at that in a few weeks as to what exactly that looks . But it can come out of sexual abuse. And then for others who've been sexually abused, it leads to self-harm urges as a way to punish themselves. Or, I said, it leads to re-victimization. , statistics say that people who have sexual abuse, 2 to 14 times more likely that they will be re-victimized, raped or sexually abused as an adult. sad. And then those who have been sexually abused, a much higher risk of them becoming addicted. Addicts. And then those sexually abused, a much higher risk of divorce in their married life. I hope what you're beginning to see is sexual abuse affects you for years and years. And it affects you, your thinking, your physical health, your mental health, your emotional health. It affects all your relationships. It is huge. Now sadly, some people have responded by saying, it didn't bother me. They minimize it. It's their brain's way of trying to move on. To get over it. But what I want you to understand is that it doesn't work. The only way to heal sexual abuse is to face it honestly. To see it accurately. To begin to be honest. To begin to be honest about how it has affected you. Minimizing it. Rationalizing it. Denying it. Doesn't lead to moving on. It always leads to more problems. what I thought I'd do is share with you the story of one of our staff at Lyft. Anita. And she's given me permission and written out her story for me. it says, For years I've struggled with this separate identity that lived inside me called my sexual identity. This identity had its own set of rules. Its own moral compass of what's wrong, or wrong behavior. A whole separate way of thinking and it got me into more trouble than I can shake a stick at. I was at a respectable office party with my closest work peers wearing my modest yet classy evening wear. I was being charming, intelligent, engaging, fun. And completely in control. Then wham. Little Miss Sexual Identity wakes up and hijacks the operating system. And I am not me anymore. Was I invited to a lot of parties and social functions? Oh you bet I was. In my twenties and thirties I was really popular. I was a lot of fun. But then of course the next morning Miss Sexual Identity was nowhere to be found. And I had to make the call of shame to ask what I did because of course I couldn't remember anything. That was always fun. The breaking point for me was nine years ago. I turned fifty and I didn't want to be here anymore. My life was all pain from the moment I woke up to the blackout drunk every night. I was incapable of having healthy relationships. And the pseudo sexual intimacy continuously fed the core shame beliefs that I had no value and was unlovable. The only option left was to get help. I had tried every avenue available to me and nothing was working. I had been in therapy for thirty years. In and out of addiction treatment centers, psychiatric units. And was medicated to the eyeballs with several different diagnoses. And here's where Tim Fletcher and his teachings come into the picture. I know most of you are with me when I say I didn't know who this Tim guy is and how he can know me . But he's telling my story. He's speaking a language I've never spoken but I know it's mine. The first message was before we can move forward. We must go forward. We must go back to our childhood trauma. We need to understand how our sexual identity was formed. And how the trauma responses are still showing up in our adult lives. Then and only then do we have the power to change them. what happened? What caused me to flip the switch and behave that way and what can I do to change it? back to my beginning. Here is a brief history to help you see a clear picture of my childhood. But I don't want to dwell too long here because it's not where the magic happens. That comes later. My father was an alcoholic and was sexually abused by his father. My mother was a narcissist who hated me, beat me and told me I was a nobody. And my grandfather was a pedophile. Sexual abuse in my family history can be dated back many generations. Which was an important piece I needed to know. Before starting my healing journey. My sexual identity began forming at the age of five. Which for me means it was prematurely woken up. I am the second youngest of five. And my mother was tired and broken down by the time I came into the picture. The only time she paid any attention to me was when she was hitting or yelling at me. I have very few memories of that. I have very few memories of my dad interacting with me as a child. And when he did I was afraid. My grandfather stayed with us often. And for me that was a good thing. He was the only adult in my world that did not touch me in anger. He would spend time with me which made me feel special, seen, important, loved. It wasn't until my early twenties that I discovered that he had been doing. That what he had been doing with me from ages five to thirteen was actually sexual abuse. I just thought that was normal. For years therapists would want me to replay what happened to me as a child. And get to the pain and sadness and I just couldn't. Not because it was too painful. But because it wasn't there. the message I left with was. I must be a pretty sick ticket if I didn't hate or feel sad. About my sexual abuse. What I walked away from my childhood with. Was a very poorly trained nurturing system. I believe that to feel loved, accepted, seen and valued. I must let others use my body for sex. Without a shadow of a doubt I stepped into adulthood knowing that sex was the only thing. That gave me value because that's all I'd ever known. I was able to begin my healing journey. First I had to stay away from sexual relations and alcohol. The second I needed to identify what my emotional needs were. And learn how to meet them in a healthy way. For the first while it was tough going. Because my default settings still wanted to use sex. When I was lonely, tired, anxious, afraid, needing love, validation, acceptance, a sense of belonging, nurtured, etc. If I was going to retrain my nurturing system to a healthy one. There were a few things I was going to have to learn to do. A new normal became checking in with myself each morning to see what emotional needs needed my attention today. Lonely? . Call a friend and connect emotionally. Anxious? . Identify the source then. Self-care? Afraid? Why? Ask yourself. What is your fear? Here to tell you. Tired? . Take some things off your plate and rest. Need a sense of belonging? . Get together with your family or surrogate family, etc. I promised myself I would abstain from sex until my new nurturing system became my new default setting. Let me tell you, more often than not, this was a lot easier said than done. What worked for me was the fact that I was able to get my mental health back. What worked for me was to treat the old sexual identity a petulant child. With a loving and kind voice, I would say to her, Oh, I see. You want to go on a dating site to connect with someone. , Kent, we can't do that now. how about a hug instead? That usually does the trick. Will I always be this way? Will I always have this old sexual identity? Who is lying dormant just looking for an opening to hijack my operating system again? Perhaps. But what I do know is that by being aware of what will trigger her to wake up again will be a key piece. If I can identify what she needs before she goes looking elsewhere for it, I can stop the dominoes before they begin to fall. Not long ago, I feared aging. Because my body would no longer be sexually desirable. I now know the fear was because I would lose the only way I knew how to feel loved and connected to others. Today, I treat my sexual addiction with love and curiosity when she is trying to get my attention. I thank her for all her years of finding a way for me to feel a little bit more of love in the world of darkness where I grew up. Then I ask her what she needs from me now. Will I ever be able to have healthy sex without the old toxic system taking over? Perhaps. If I keep my emotional love tank topped up on a regular basis and am consistently meeting my emotional needs in a healthy way. For me, I now know that to get to sexual intimacy with someone I have to go through the stages of relationship. that I can build a deep emotional connection and foundation with them. Sex with someone you love is putting icing on an already delicious cake. You don't need it for the cake to taste good on its own. But sure is a nice treat when you do. For most of us with complex trauma, we didn't have healthy parents who mirrored back to us the parts of ourselves that truly give us value. We are much more than their distorted versions of us. Do I blame them? Or hate my parents and grandfather? No, not anymore. rest their souls. I now understand why they were that way. They were victims of their own abuse. The lie I believed was it was because I was a bad kid. But the truth is it had absolutely nothing to do with me. I can love them now. It is a really good feeling. Thank you Anita for saying that clearly. I am grateful for that. Thank you. Thank you to them. Thank you to all the people that have heard what we have to say. I have said it sensitively but wisely. I have done this talk today not to take you to deeper pain with no resolution available. I have done this talk to hopefully help you to reach out for help. And on the screen again you are going to see the email that you can email or you can go to TimFletcher.CA website. Lift menu and find out a place to become part of a group for sexual abuse survivors. And I hope that you will do that. , thank you much for being here. Hope this evening has been helpful for you.