, welcome to another Friday night. We're winding down our series on the prisons that come out of complex trauma, the things that were necessary survival coping patterns in childhood in order to survive the abuse or neglect, but what have become now in adult life big problems, causing issues in relationships, jobs, hurting others, hurting ourselves. And what happens for many people is they go to try to stop doing it, but something keeps drawing them back into repeating it. It becomes a prison. And today I want to talk about the potential that happens for many with complex trauma is to begin to confuse sexuality as being love. And this is to me a talk that I've touched on four or five different times because sexuality is such a big component for me. Many people in recovery that they need to think through, that they realize is unhealthy in their life. And I want to come at it from a little different perspective today that I hope is really helpful. I want you to know up front a couple of things. Number one, I want you to know that I'm not going to approach this in moralistic terms. What I've seen over the years is that for most people coming out of complex trauma, it affects their sexuality in. In negative ways. And for many people coming out of complex trauma, they're not even aware of that. But when they get to adult life, they begin to realize that they have some sexual behaviors that they realize are unhealthy, that are hurting themselves, that are hurting others. And they go to want to stop it, but something keeps every time they're triggered in certain ways, they just go back to those unhealthy sexual behaviors. it's realizing the unhealthy sexuality, sexual behaviors that come out of complex trauma, that is our focus today. Now, what you begin to realize when you work in this field is that sexuality is a massive subject. And what they're realizing from research is sexuality affects almost every part of our life. one of the things we see with complex trauma is it affects our brain, our immune system, our nervous system, our physical health. It just touches everything. It just touches everything. Every part of what makes us human. What we're seeing with sexuality, it's almost just as powerful. It affects almost every part of what makes us human. It affects our nervous system, our body, our brain, our relationships, our regulation stress system. It's involved in attachment. It's a somatic type of thing that affects the brain. It's just one of the core areas, it affects the whole culture on the planet, but what came from ourzufuse DNA that's for your pollution, it's a big picture. For example, what is beingtober in the environment. We think that when we see that you can have sex, for the first few years and then hurting yourself, you don't forever die. It's a practice. After yourky sägevation, your trihブiously эсṣув Speechyes, you start to see the impact of that shifts from feeling healthy towards feeling feels and the mental health differently. It's a process of wie fish Menschen in bevrouwtat because às we can see from our perspective that is our emotional quality. doesn't affect anything I can look at it just in certain very narrow terms no sexuality impacts who we are in almost every area and it makes us extremely vulnerable what I want you to see from today is what happens in early childhood with complex trauma is the child begins to think or the brain begins to think that sexuality is the way to meet many of their emotional needs the brain gets a little confused many of the emotional needs that the child has if there's been sexual abuse if there's been neglect and now sex is used for self-soothing they begin to think that the way to meet emotional needs is through sex now today every time that emotional need is triggered the brain goes let's go to sex and now they have sexual behaviors that come out of multiple triggers that are connected to emotional needs now Dr Ruth Kohn says each one of us has a sex life weather completely and internal and wish for or actually lived in real time the key point is everybody has a sex life doesn't have to be just acted out sex. It could be a total internal fantasy world sex, but it's still a sex life. we must take this as a given that everybody has a sex life. Some clients may have made their peace with whatever expression is or has been in their sex life, including asexuality. Some are totally with that. But others haven't made peace with this sex life that they have. And they live with grief. They live with anger. They're mad about lost time or missed experience. Or they live with a deep loneliness of skin hunger or touch, just longing to be touched. Deprivation or body hatred. Many feel robbed. Many feel cheated. I think that's said. Then she says this, beginning my journey towards sex therapy certification, I was surprised to learn just how wide the range is of sexual fantasy, sexual pleasure, and sexual behavior. I was much less sexually intelligent than I thought I was. In turn, I learned how narrow and arbitrary sex life is. I was much less sexually intelligent than I thought I was. Then I learned about the Zach Korob, who helped me in my programmed und configurable behavior in today's society, with between verbal and verbal movement, with braul andbat style dodge. And later, she also learned to love sex for a return. And I was amazed that she met a chance with which I could back jump it again immediately. I found love something extra, but not for theorrowful pleasure of observing successfully and loving yawning. The lights just don't come on one side of her gut. It turns out in those первures and aneltisms, Max, to call those Dabei, that fold over emotionless and online claps responded to a spread of highways , of which lots of people are Namely her quote, bolding that she spoke a word in terms of rest, for Playena, Hobart, or begitu muchushing she did ever before. And now we face other people, who believe her as the to find and access reliable and useful sexuality information. The subject of sex still appears to be a point of shame or taboo or ignorance many of our clients struggle to understand. there's tons of sexual images and sexual tillation in our media, but there's not clear talk about sex to help people understand sex. And many of our clients really don't understand their sexuality very is the point. They wonder what is wrong with me and a lack of reliable reference to measure against and nobody's safe to ask about sex. And their brain goes to, it's just a natural drive, it should be kind of automatic that what to do. in the movies, you should just automatically know what your partner and how to achieve that. And all the more when you're in a very self-reliant world, it's certainly anything but natural to think that one should need help in figuring out what normal is. said. I want to go to kind of four major ways that the sexual drive in a child can get distorted or twisted. the obvious one is sexual abuse. That does much damage in a child that distorts sexuality sometimes. And this is hard to say, but important to say sometimes almost irreparably. I have worked for many years in counseling people with sexual abuse. And sadly, what I've seen with some is that they may never heal to the point. I think that's the key to being able to engage in a healthy intimate sexual relationship. There's just too much damage been done. Too many things get triggered today as soon as they go to engage in sex. It's just sad. Others, they may finally eventually get to a more healthy sexual place and be able to have a healthy sexual relationship with somebody. But it could take years, years and years to get to a healthy sexual relationship. And that's the only way to get to a better adult, that's the only way to get to a better virgin. great patience is required, tons of work is required. There's not a magic fix to just make it go away. Sting andsolvilleblog alright. entrepreneursrubbing.com The second thing and we're going to develop this today that really messes up sexuality is neglect. And most have never really considered that before. And I really want to explained that as we go into our talk today. Whagramughter Arthur Director soundtrack The third thing is grow up in a family where one of your parents has unresolved issues around sex. anything that is sexual in the child, the parent overreacts to. And that can do tremendous damage and really distort the sexual drive of the child. The fourth thing is parents or growing up in an environment that has very repressive teaching around sexuality, almost puritanical. some of you have grown up where it's been taught or you just pick up that sexual desires, having sexual desires, that you're bad, that you're doing something wrong, that's a terrible thing to have sexual desires. Then some of you have heard kind of sexism. Sex is dirty. It's an obligation. It's a necessity to have kids, but it's kind of a dirty thing. Some of you have grown up where it's the job of women to make men happy. women should be willing to sacrifice all their needs and their desires and do whatever their husband wants, but it's all about the man. Some of you, you grew up where it was wrong to learn about sexuality, explore sexuality, experiment sexually, read about the subject in depth. That would be you're indulging something really bad in you. Some of you grew up where you can enjoy sex a little bit, but don't enjoy it too much. That then would be having an idol in your life where you're kind of loving something more than . that's a very good thing. there's a lot of things that you can do. I think that's a great point. And I think it's important to think about that. And I think that's a really good point. And I think that's a really good point. You could push yourself, I think you could push yourself into that. And the other thing about all of that is that there's another doctrine for all people and people forulsiveness, where people say you're a bunch of jerks but over and over again I don't know where to spread the기witletheanti. beautiful truth, subtle truth for women, but connect your Important Passions with the Deuxile, I'm with you. We also Dr最後 was a Fan of Ne Chandler J'aime battery. For a long time, this drama has been produced for this monolog of Desire 분 Special Oral Sense Vendor for disciplining sexual desires andcongratulatory potent queliton Bieber termineмат力 and causing sexual desire in women, blurringions and perils finale, rubbish damage, and unnecessary main air. It was blamed on the women, and women therefore had to dress a certain way to not evoke sexual desires in men. Others in a patriarchal society where the men always were to initiate sex, the women just respond. And the women better respond positively if the man initiated it. I could go on and on, but for many of you, you grew up with all kinds of teaching around sexuality that actually really messed you up when it came to developing your sexual drive in a healthy way. Now, it's been important in the research to begin to understand that people go through two times in their life, two periods in their life, where there's major development. And then there's the second period, which is the period of development in the sexual area, which then affects the rest of themselves. four to six-year-old is that kind of the first period where a child is in the discovery of their body. And they're exploring their body. It's just innocent. They're finding out they have a penis, a vagina, all of those things. They're finding out that girls are different than guys. They play doctor. All of those things are there. What I want you to see is to that four to six-year-old. Love is non-sexual. Love is just love. It has no sexual connotations for them. But if a child at four to six in this exploration stage is shamed for exploring, it does tremendous damage. If they are abused sexually at this stage, it can do tremendous damage. this is a very vulnerable stage. The second. The third. The fourth. The sixth. The seventh. The second one is puberty and it's even more vulnerable. the sex drive is awakening, the body is changing, sexual attraction is developing and all of a sudden there's pubic hair, there's growth, development and they become self-conscious. They're extremely vulnerable at this time to being laughed at, to comparing themselves to others. Their whole identity becomes wrapped up in their sexuality. It's an extremely vulnerable time. with that as a background, let's move into what then happens to a child who goes through some way that behavior in their parents and their home that affects them sexually. neglect, abuse, parents that overreact, bad teaching. the first thing that can happen from sexual abuse, from neglect. Is they go to hypersexual drive or no sexual drive. the hypersexual drive, sexual abuse in that four to six year old age, that exploration stage. What can happen when you awake a drive too early is it becomes a hyper drive. And now the child can't get enough sex. Sex becomes a big part of everything that gives them pleasure, that lets them escape, that they want more. More of to get more and more pleasure. it becomes a hyper drive. But also with that, what can happen for a child is if they're sexually abused at that age, something in their brain goes, I am getting validation. This is what I'm good at. This is what I have value in my sexuality, my body, my looks. And now their whole validation is based on those things. And. And that sex is a way to get the validation they need to meet their validation need. And it gets distorted. And they begin to pursue sex constantly because they're seeking the validation and being desirable. The flip side is they can go to asexuality. they have zero interest in sex. sex to them has been dirty. It's hurt them. It's disgusting. And they just don't want it. And if they go to have sex, it triggers all kinds of flashbacks or they just feel dirty. They feel tremendous amounts of guilt. And they just don't want anything to do with sex. Some of these people often end up hating their body because they think their body's the culprit. It made others desire to sexually abuse them. they hate their body. Some then begin overeating as a way to gain weight that they're less desirable in their body. And that then becomes an issue for many people that struggle with obesity. Something else that can happen and it's a blend of the two is for many people that come out of neglect or abuse is they are attracted to somebody, but there's been shame that's developed. They think they're not enough themselves. when they go to start a relationship with somebody, they think the only way to attract this person and be desirable is to give lots of sex. And in the beginning of the relationship, there's just constant sex. It's hyper sex. But then as soon as the relationship starts to grow and move towards deeper intimacy, they back away from sex. They don't want to go any further into intimacy. And sex is a way to attract this person. And they're attracted to this person. But then as soon as the relationship starts to grow and move towards deeper intimacy, sex becomes less and less frequent. And in some cases, it becomes non-existent. And it starts with hyper sex and it goes towards asexual. The next thing that can happen in severe sexual abuse or severe physical abuse is that the child develops dissociation as the necessary way of surviving. they leave their body. They disconnect from their emotions. disconnect from their body and they live in their head they live in a fantasy world they live with constant distractions and busyness just they don't feel but they still have a desire to feel their body and sometimes what happens is sex today as an adult is the only way they can get in touch with their body and they periodically will have sex just as the only way to get in touch with their body another thing that happens with complex trauma is that the child grows up without parents to help them regulate their emotions the parents are dysregulated themselves the parents are absent the parents are angry stressed out and the child has no healthy co-regulation for their emotions and they have to learn their own ways of self-soothing and one of the things that they learn often as a way that is a self-soothing behavior is sex masturbation and many begin to develop sexual behaviors younger in life because they provide a soothing effect they're meeting a need what I want you to see is you're going to be able to get into a relationship with your partner and you're going to be able to get into a relationship with your partner and you're going to be able to get into a relationship with your partner is what is happening in this child is sex begins to be seen as something that's going to meet multiple needs validation self-soothing or regulation of emotions another thing that can happen for many children of neglect especially but also of abuse as they begin to realize I can't trust anybody nobody's going to be there for me I have to do everything myself therefore when it comes to sex masturbation and sex masturbation is a very important thing to do and it's a very important thing to do and it's a very important thing to do and it's a very important thing to do and palate and important thing to do and palate and parent Rodrigo's major interest that these children are successful they are comfortable they are nice they are very social they don't want to do anything to their male directly they will be very sexual they don't want to do anything to their male directly they will be very But I have been at pains for a long time even within just one week it wasn't my first trabalhar for a long time even within just one week it wasn't my first hice that wasisolation adaptive screenshots sex drive especially since they're still kleine they're at Где they're not conscious with their but yet masturbation just doesn't totally cut it. And they find themselves very torn inside. Another thing that comes out of neglect and abuse is the person becomes that self-reliant individual that puts up walls, wears masks, doesn't allow connection with other people. And now when they go to actually have sex and they want sex and they want an intimate relationship, it just feels foreign, uncomfortable. They just don't know what to do with it. sex becomes a very uncomfortable piece for them. They want it. They want to do it . They want intimacy, but they just are uncomfortable with closeness. Another thing that can happen for some is that if they had, let's say, a mother who is just very against sex, against closeness, if you tried to hug her, she'd push you away. If you did anything or talked about sex, she would always, that's repulsive. she was just cold, frigid, negative about sex. And what can happen for some people is that they actually seek out partners in adult life that. Somebody who's going to kind of recreate the response to sex that their mother gave them. Another thing that can happen is that many love the sex, but they don't want the intimacy. That scares them to death. they bounce from relationship to relationship almost a tornado in this impulsive, compulsive sexual activity of hopping from partner to partner to try to gratify all their sexual desires without creating intimate relationships. what I want you to see is that these people often are trying to balance two competing forces. And they're very powerful forces. the one is, I want to gratify this sexual desire, and I want to get rid of the loneliness and have some type of relationship. But I don't want the intimacy because I might get hurt again. I don't want to be. get too involved in a relationship and then get abandoned again. And how do I do a dance where I'm kind of getting my sex needs met, I'm getting some relationship stuff, but I'm not getting too close that I'm going to lose the relationship? And that's what they're trying to balance as they go into their sexual world. Something else that some do is they go, I'm not even going to go to acting out my sexual needs with actual people that I could have a relationship with. I am going to do it with sex workers, by going to strip clubs, live sex performances. intimacy for them and their sexual experience for them is more wrapped up in a fantasy world. Some, they go totally to a fantasy world. And now they don't even have sex with individuals ever. It's just porn and movies and all of that is just feeds a fantasy sexual world. Some don't even go to any of that stuff. And they just live in this constant state of gnawing skin hunger and longing to be loved, longing to be touched, longing for somebody to want sexual intimacy with them that is pure and, and clean and full of love. That just leads to this haunting loneliness. Others just try to repress all of that and bury that, but it's still there. It's a haunting ache inside of them. Now, there's another thing that can happen for children that come out of trauma. And that is as they've dissociated, as they've kind of pushed down their emotions because they're only negative emotions. They've disconnected from feelings. Now, they're serving life. And that另 with a sense of being around signs and besides with that, готов for a spiritual this reality, which of all , doesn't encompass life, also the responsibility to change the world. there's multiple things that they can do. One of them that really Outw銘 will generate a sense of complete change. And one of the ways that you can annul those Infinite hate leaning on those Democrat or racial or social globalization behavior, is to only see theSi, the truthahah, somewhere very close.niejproskham experiatsfac Denmark I know there's sacrosanct feelings. He says you can Phiev there's still racism out there in Africa at Net Baageue. adds an extra shot of feeling alive again sexes they're trying to use it to meet another need the emptiness the deadness inside of them now let me take this to where this starts to get confused with love if you go in your thinking to a child who has a deep longing to connect and to be loved that is just the massive drive within every child what happens though in complex trauma they have this massive longing to be loved and this massive longing to connect but they're not able to connect they now go into trying to adapt they still long to be loved but they now are afraid to connect because every time they've tried to connect they've been hurt badly what they begin to realize is that sex gives them all the feelings of love but lets them avoid intimacy they now feel sexually they now feel desired and that feels love now for them love and sex begin to be confused because as soon as there's sex they feel desired and that feels love , what I want you to see is what is happening in the child who hasn't been able to connect and who isn't getting unconditional love is the wires in their brain begin to get crossed the child begins to think that sex meets all my love needs it gives me tenderness it gives me nurturance somebody sees me somebody respects me somebody accepts me somebody validates me somebody becomes a tune to me I have feelings of connection I have pleasure it medicates pain sex is meeting all my needs especially my love needs and the brain then begins to cross its wires and think sex is love and that is where the life trap begins to really take place now there's other things that are happening in complex trauma. they're not only seeing sex as meeting needs, but they're also beginning to see sex as a solution to some of the issues that come out of complex trauma. what are the common issues that come out of complex trauma? Shame. I don't feel good enough. I don't feel lovable. But all of a sudden, somebody wants sex with me. I feel lovable. Oh, that just solved my shame issue. sex is now the solution to my shame. Whenever I'm feeling shame, just go out and make sure somebody wants to have sex with me, and then I'm good. Another thing that can happen with that shame issue is I feel less than. I feel inferior to everybody else. And what can happen, sadly, for some people, is sex now becomes a way to feel superior. I take the lead. I take change. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I take the lead. I dominate the other person. For some, they actually can use sex to be a way to demean other people by they just dominate that other person. Another thing that comes out of complex trauma is just this longing for connection but don't know how to connect. And now, when I have sex, I have the feelings of connection. I go, oh, that just solved all my connection issues. And then another issue that comes out of complex trauma is that haunting fear, I'm going to be abandoned. And every time I'm afraid I'm going to be abandoned, oh, I better go have sex because then the person wants me and they're not going to abandon me. now, sex is not just seen as the solution to all my needs and my love needs. It's now seen as a solution to all of the issues that come out of complex trauma. Now, I need to take this, and this to me is such a significant piece to understand. it's important to understand that there's two types of sex. there's pure just physical sex or animal sex or genital sex. It's just the physical stuff that happens that creates orgasm. But then there's attachment-based sex. And that is sex that takes place not just because physical stimulation, but because of a moment of silence. And that's the way that I'm going to be abandoned. Emotional needs being met because of pure healthy connection and safety happening. That is the most satisfying type of sex. That is when sex gives the greatest pleasure. what is necessary for attachment-based sex? number one, it will only happen if both partners feel safe. Secondly, if they're capable of secure emotional attachment, and thirdly, both are in their parasympathetic nervous system, then there's going to be healthy attachment-based sex. But let's go to a child from complex trauma. , all three of those conditions are not, they're not capable of. They don't feel safe. They aren't able to securely attach. And they're in their sympathetic nervous system. what is happening to them? They're not able to secure emotional attachment. and complex trauma is the very three things necessary to learn the most satisfying form of sex. They're not in an environment where any of those three things are going to happen. what then happens to that child? They get into their puberty years, they experience sex, but it's purely physical. They're in their sympathetic nervous system. They don't feel safe. They're not connecting. They're not transitioning, but they get their puberty years. the physical sensation. And to their brain, that's all they've known. That's all they've experienced. they think, this is sex. what do they focus on? I will become a professional in learning how to have the greatest physical genital sex in the world. I will learn every technique. I will study the physical organ and the physical act that I get the greatest sex in the world. That's where their thinking goes. They do not, they have not been exposed to attachment-based sex, to understanding the psychological, emotional components of truly satisfying, meaningful sex. And they sadly, and this at times just breaks my heart, but they do not, they do not, they do not, they do not, they do not, they do not, they are pursuing enhancing the physical aspects of sex, but are totally missing out on understanding the emotional attachment basis of sex. And they will not experience truly, truly satisfying sex. And that happens for many. Now, let me just very quickly cover, to summarize, what are some of the areas then that are affected by a child's sexuality. And we started with this, and I just want to highlight a couple things. number one, a child's sexuality has a profound effect on the shaping of a child's identity. nothing intensifies the feelings of vulnerability in a child sexual stuff. how a person responds to a child in those key developmental stages, has a profound effect on their identity. a child then going into puberty, somebody laughs at them in the locker room about the size of their penis, about their pubic hair, about their slow development of breasts, that shatters them, that creates shame, that messes up their identity. It then produces tons of anxiety, tons of fear, a profound impact on identity. But then, sex touches many of our needs. When you look at our acceptance need, it's our whole personality, but it also includes our sexuality. And how somebody responds to me sexually, that affects whether I feel accepted. It touches our abandonment issues. It touches our validation issues. It touches our guilt or false guilt issues. It's very much part of, the process of trying to find a relationship with someone. And I think that's a very important part of the process of trying to find a relationship with someone. learning boundaries. I can say no. It's about learning autonomy, where I end, where you begin, what I can say no to, what I can allow for myself. It's very much connected to our trust issues. It's very much connected to our attachment connection issues. sex is connected to basically every need. But when a child thinks that becomes a solution totally to meeting that need, that's where it goes wrong. Hopefully you're listening to this and going, I see how my complex trauma has distorted some of my sexuality and resulted in some unhealthy approaches to sexuality. How do I heal? begin by understanding the things from your childhood that distorted your sexual development. Be very clear about that. And then begin to differentiate between the things that distorted your sexual development and the things that distorted your sexual development. And then begin to differentiate between the things that how those things did distort your sexuality. look for patterns of behavior that developed, emotional patterns that developed, beliefs that developed about yourself, about sex, the needs that you tried to meet with sex, the issues that you tried to solve with sex. Just kind of map out how your sexuality developed and how it all interfaces, with everything else. Then find somebody safe that you can begin to talk honestly about these issues without fear of being judged, without fear of them thinking you're a pervert or a sick person. Somebody that you can really begin to process this stuff. Then accept that even though you might be 40 or 50, you've never learned healthy sexuality. Now you need to learn it. And some people, when they realize that they're a late learner, that they're learning at 50 or 40 what they should have been learning in puberty, they get feeling shame. I'm stupid. I should have known this. No, don't go there. Or others get angry. I'm mad that I wasn't taught this. And they just want to lash out. That anger's natural. Just don't feed into it. Don't go there too much, but acknowledge it. Some get very impatient. , I want to learn it all now. Just understand it's better late than never. Better to start now than not at all. This is where I'm at. I need to start learning healthy sexuality. And with that, learn the difference in your life between attachment-based sex and just purely physical animal sex. When you can begin to learn how to learn sex, how to have emotional intimacy first as part of sex, as the foreplay. And foreplay's not just a half hour before the sex. It's the whole week, 24-7, of learning to connect emotionally, providing safety. And that means there's going to be growing trust, growing acceptance, growing openness, growing vulnerability, growing connection, and talking about deep relationships. And you can start to learn more about what you're going to be doing. And that's when you start to learn how to do deeper and deeper things. When you are really working on developing that, what you're going to begin to realize, it just enhances your sex life. Your sex becomes even more pleasurable. It's the cherry on top of the sundae. with that, to me this is important. Learn to communicate regularly and openly with your partner about sex. What I have found for many, many couples is they can talk about everything except sex. It's the topic that just gets avoided. They expect the person to just kind of read their mind, to figure it out. Talk about it. There's no shame in that. Talk about your needs. Talk about your . Talk about your dislikes. Talk about frequency. Talk about things you would to explore. Talk about your love language and things that help you emotionally to warm up. And to feel connected. Have all of those conversations. Now I just want to add as a little sidebar. Don't be afraid to have times where you plan sex at a certain time of the week. Now I think there's been a misunderstanding that many people think that spontaneous sex is the best sex. But for many from complex trauma, that's not true. But for many from complex trauma, that's not true. But for many from complex trauma, that's not true. Because what happens is they're afraid to express their needs, and they walk around on pins and needles, hinting at sex, that they're interested, wanting sex, hoping their partner will offer sex, but they're afraid to say anything. And it just adds stress, it adds anxiety, then it adds anger when their sexual needs aren't being met and their partner's not responding. if you can just say, let's go for a time where we just plan, we're going to have sex, we're going to work towards that, we're going to spend ourselves preparing for it, getting in the mood, it can actually help couples as they develop healthy sexual lives. Next thing is in your own life, learn what healthy sexuality is for you and what unhealthy sexuality looks for you. for many people, there will be times when masturbation is actually a healthy thing. There's going to be times when it's not. There's going to be times when masturbation is a very unhealthy thing. You need to know the difference. There are going to be times when you're looking forward to sex with your partner and you start to fantasize about having sex with your partner, and that can be very healthy. But there will be times when that can become unhealthy and that can take you to very dangerous places in your mind. Then you're going to have to learn when it comes to frequency, ? I might have a greater sexual drive now than my partner does, I want it more often than they do. do I just want them to give in and give themselves to me every time I want it, or do I need to learn some self-control we find a balance that sometimes I do without, sometimes they make a sacrifice? I have to figure that out. The thing to really watch out for is you do not want a relationship where the sexual relationship is not a sexual relationship, but it is basically determined by what one partner wants. you get somebody with a hypersexual drive that just wants it all the time and is mad if the partner doesn't constantly give it to them and doesn't constantly sacrifice for them, or you get somebody from severe sexual abuse that just never wants it and expects the other partner to go without sex. you want to find a balance, a way to meet both partners' sexual needs in a healthy way, and that is tricky and important to learn how to navigate . Next thing I want you to be aware of is there are going to be times when sexual activity will trigger underlying issues. it will trigger shame, it will trigger false guilt, it will make you feel very vulnerable, it will make you fear being rejected. it's going to trigger a whole bunch of complex trauma issues. When that happens, don't get down on yourself, but be curious. Explore what's going on here, where's that coming from, what happened in my childhood to cause me to have this trigger? Are there any lies that come out of this that I need to be aware of? That becomes the process of continued growth in this area, is every time you're triggered, you begin to explore, learn new things, and then you grow a little bit more. let me end by what for me is a very challenging scenario. And that is when you end up in a relationship with somebody who comes out of severe sexual abuse. I have worked with many couples, and what typically happens is the person is severely sexually abused, they just, sex triggers them too much, they don't want sex, the other partner ends up with this powerful sex drive, but they just, every time they want to have sex, their partner gets mad, there's a big conflict, and they have to do without sex. Ruth Cohn talks about her early days as a sex therapist, and back in the early 90s, there was basically one book out on this topic, and it was by Wendy Maltz called The Sexual Healing Journey. And here's what Ruth Cohn says, that one lonely volume was practical and hands-on about things couples might try and do, however, the heart of its message was that the partner of the designated traumatized, in this case the sexually violated client, the one who had been sexually abused, that the partner needed to be patient and supportive, beyond saintly, a little therapist-, in effect they were to disappear or disavow their own pain and discomfort. In other words, they were to be patient with their partner, but basically stop having any sexual needs, any sexual desires. they were to continue to endure, wait, figure out how to manage their own physical and emotional desire and frustration about the lack of sex. This approach was understandably wearing thin for these men and for many that wildly understates it. It was torture, it was cruel. Meanwhile, the person who had been sexually abused, they felt guilty for saying no all the time. They felt pressured into giving in and having sex, which then re-traumatized them, and that sure didn't make them feel more desirous by them saying no, by them having many issues. it just starts creating even greater baggage between the couple. while the partner somehow tolerates, sexless, often completely touchless, monogamy, and often for years, they both felt terribly stymied and often desperate. And it certainly did not help that no one seemed to be talking with them about the problem, about sex. Rather, the whole subject was sorely neglected. The survival of sexual trauma was designated as the problem child, while the partner was essentially sidelined, overlooked, taken for granted, and in effect neglected. This is, to me, such a huge issue for many people coming out of complex trauma that they end up with somebody with sexual abuse. They get into a relationship, they love each other, but the sexual relationship just causes much problems. The other person just can't do it, and then that means this person has to give up their needs, and it causes much pain and frustration and conflict and anger and resentment. Get help. Begin to work through that you can both figure out how to help each other sexually, to meet your sexual needs, to heal and grow. I said, this is a massive topic. I hope what I've shared today helps you understand yourself better, helps you understand areas that you need to grow and improve to have an even better sexual life. Thank you for being here. It's the end of another Friday.