, we're almost done this series on shame. And I said in the previous talks, when I teach shame at React, we do a whole week on it. It is one of the heaviest weeks for clients as they begin to realize how much shame they have. Because for them, it's something that's always operated at a subconscious level. And it's impacted them. They just haven't been aware of it. And as they become aware of it, it just really gets heavy for them. And what I hear starting on Tuesday is, when are you going to tell us how to heal from shame? When are you going to tell us how to heal from shame? And I said, not until you sit in it for a while and let me diagnose it and really convince you as to how screwed up you are. And that you understand just how big this issue is. tonight I want to come to the healing from shame. And we're only going to do one part tonight. And then next Friday we're going to do the rest of the healing from shame. And I hope it is a very helpful thing for you. And what, again, we've said in all of the talks, in my mind it is the greatest negative consequence of complex trauma. And it has the greatest. greatest negative impact on a person's life. Because what shame is, is a core belief about yourself. And it's a core belief that is negative. It is a core belief that says, I don't think I'm good enough. I think the reason I was rejected, abandoned, abused, neglected, is because I must have something wrong with me that makes me unlovable and I don't have any value. And that core belief begins to morph in all kinds of different. directions and affects all your adult relationships, your coping, the messages that go on in your head. And it's all negative. And what do we do to begin to heal? what I want to do is, what I do with the clients, is the first step of healing is to begin to understand what happens or has been happening at a subconscious level in your. life. what I do is I put a diagram on the board and I say, your shame can be triggered in hundreds of different ways. And I'm going to go through some of that. And once it's triggered, your shame is triggered, that triggers a whole bunch of systems inside of you. And once that trigger happens, what follows from that is something that can happen in a nanosecond. But for most. people, it will follow a pattern. when your shame is triggered, it will trigger certain types of thoughts. It'll affect how you think. And you could be thinking in a very healthy way. Once your shame is triggered, your thoughts go in a very negative direction. But it doesn't just affect your thinking. It brings up other emotions, none of them positive, all of them negative, and they feed your thinking and make it even more. negative. Which. creates even more negative emotions and it starts feeding off of itself. And then that leads to actions, things that you do when you feel that shame trigger. And all of them are negative as . And they feed the thoughts and emotions in a more negative way. And you set up a system that only gets worse and worse inside of you. And it doesn't resolve the shame problem. And you have to start by understanding that system. And here's the main reason why. Everybody has a pattern. And it might start with thoughts and emotions and then it goes to behaviors. And the longer you're in shame, those behaviors become dominoes. They start falling. And if you stay in shame and don't resolve it, the dominoes usually will lead to a relapse. And for most people. without even realizing it, shame is one of their initial dominoes on the road to a relapse. Or it could lead to acting out in self-destructive ways, harmful ways to yourself and to your relationships. the earlier you can catch your pattern and stop the dominoes, the easier it will be to turn it around. But if you don't stop the dominoes, there comes a line. And once you cross that line, it's a line of no return. You are going to do something destructive to yourself. Either a relapse or something else. the whole point of self-awareness is to understand your triggers. Understand how they affect you that you can begin to change them. And begin to stop them because they are nothing but a series of triggers. And that's what we're going to do. And that's what we're going to do. We're going to do a series of negative things. let's go through the things tonight. And you can again do a self-evaluation. You can put check marks by the ones that would be your shame triggers. by a shame trigger, I am referring to anything that makes you feel less than, not good enough, inferior, bad, not lovable. Rejected. All of those things. they can come in two ways. They can come from people or they can come from events. let's begin with the triggers that people can produce in you. let's say somebody asks you to do a job. And you do it for them. And when they look at the job you do, you can see disappointment in their eye. What just happened inside of you? Your shame got triggered. And all of a sudden you put your head down. You feel insecure. You can't look the person in the eye. You can't wait to get out of there. And you beat yourself up all day long. That's what I mean by a shame trigger. anytime you see disappointment in somebody's eyes, that can be a powerful trigger. Another one is you feel that something is wrong. You feel that somebody is getting impatient with you because you're not catching on fast enough. they ask you to do something or they're trying to teach you a new skill. And you realize you're not catching on and you think they're getting impatient and you start feeling shame. Now some of that, they might not be impatient with you at all. But you grew up where mom got impatient with you. You didn't learn perfectly the first time. And you think everybody is going to be impatient with you unless you learn perfectly or do it perfectly the first time. you then read shame in where there is really no shame. It's just your past affecting you. The next one, I don't know if this is true of you, but some people when you look at somebody and you're in pain or you're struggling, and you look at them and talk to them and you see pity in their eyes, you go to shame. You don't feel that they love me or they care about you. You feel I'm not good enough because I'm struggling much and they pity me. That can be a trigger. If somebody sets a boundary with you, and we've talked about this, they say no, you can't come over, or no, I'm not going to go out for coffee with you. You feel shame and conclude, it must be because I'm not good enough. And you go to that shame place. If you say something, you're in a conversation with somebody, and you state something that you believe is a fact, and they say no, that's not , and they correct you, some of you go to shame. Or if you do a job and somebody says, can I give you some feedback? You go, -oh, what did I do wrong? And you go to shame. If you've been working on something or doing something and somebody comes up to you and says, can I give you a suggestion? You go to shame because all of that in your mind says, I'm not good enough. I must be doing something wrong. I must be doing a terrible job. That's why they're making suggestions or giving me feedback. If you're in a conversation with somebody and you're talking away and all of a sudden they talk over top of you, some of you might go to shame. Or, you're talking to somebody and you're pretty sure they just rolled their eyes, or they actually rolled their eyes, some of you go to shame. Now here's what some of you will do. You don't to feel shame, you switch to a second emotion. that rolling your eyes is a good example. What emotion do you go to immediately after you feel shame? Anger. Because you think if I'm feeling anger, then I won't feel the shame. And I'll feel empowered. anger becomes a secondary emotion for a lot of people to cover the shame emotion when they feel it. If somebody does something that in any way makes you feel stupid, you can go to shame. you're seeing there's all these different triggers. one of the things I ask clients is, how many times a day does your shame get triggered? And some go, once a minute. And I go, wow. And if you start to think about that, you go, wow, when my shame gets triggered, we haven't even got to what that then triggers inside of you, but that's a lot of triggering happening. , next one, if you're talking with somebody, and they keep looking down at their phone, or you can tell their eyes are glazing over, they're not giving you their full attention, you can go to shame. And you think it's all your fault. Or if you hear anybody whispering, you're pretty sure they're talking about you. And you go to shame. Or if you hear two people laughing, you're pretty sure they're laughing at you. And you can go to shame. again, it might not be true at all, but that's where your brain goes because of your history. And what whispering meant and laughing meant when you were a child. Next one, when others do a task better than you. you get asked to do something, and then somebody else gets asked to do something. And what are you doing the whole time you're doing something? It's comparing yourself to that person. And you get to the end of it, and you realize they did a better job than I did, you can go to shame. Or you come up with the greatest idea in the world, and you come to me and say, I have a great idea for finding freedom, and then I don't follow your advice. Some of you can go to shame. Disrespect is one of the biggest shame triggers for people, but they don't realize it because they go to anger quickly once they're disrespected. But shame is a part of that. Any conflict with another person can create shame because you're thinking the reason we're having conflict is because I'm not doing anything. I must be doing something wrong. They're mad at me, anger or anybody that's angry at you can trigger shame. You might have somebody who you're in a serious debate with, and you're 100 sure you're , and they're 100 sure they're . let me give you an example from Kim and I. we're both pushing 60. Our memories aren't what they used to be. I'm pretty sure I told her something she's pretty sure I didn't. And we can argue for hours if we want to about it. Yes, I told you. No, you didn't. let's say she goes out and gets a whole bunch of proof somehow that I never told her. And that proof now proves me wrong. After I've argued strongly that I've been all along, now there's no doubt that I am wrong. That can be a huge shame thing. Another thing that people can do is body language. I ask clients all the time, what are body language things that produce shame? wagging the finger can be one. Raising, mom raising her eyebrow. Somebody sitting there with their arms crossed looking at you with their brow furrowed. All of those things can produce or trigger shame. How many of you have been trying to do something and all of a sudden you heard mom say, the sigh of exasperation. That can produce shame in you today. Or you have a friend and they're depressed or struggling and they're just not interested in talking to you, spending time with you. They avoid you and you can go to shame. You can take that personally. Or something else. Or somebody can, you get to a family reunion and some uncle will say, do you remember what you did when you were five years old? And they drag out of the memory bank this very embarrassing thing you did when you were little and you can go to shame. This can be a long list, eh? Realizing how many triggers, you realize I could have doubled this list if I wanted to? I just knew you were going to get tired of it. , we're almost done it. Twenty-eight in total. Partner throws your past in your face. Some of you will go to shame with that. Partner gives you the silent treatment for a day or two. Or withholds love from you. You try to hug them and you hug an iceberg. And there's nothing given back. Some of you will go to shame. Your parents, you're there visiting them and they take shots at you and keep putting you down. That can be a big trigger. Sometimes you hang around people who are very good living, but their nose is in the air that they're better than you. Part of you is angry. But there are some of you that can trigger your shame as . And you take that on. Or you have people, your dad or your mom that say, how come you're still on EIA? Don't you have a job yet? Don't men should be providing for their families? And they're judging you by a standard that they've made. You can't get them to prove where that standard is anywhere. They just say, everybody knows this is the way it is. And you feel judged. Less than and it's a big trigger to your shame. Anything that makes you feel rejected or threatens abandonment or makes you feel you're being abandoned or you're around friends but you don't feel part of all of a sudden. Or you're around friends and they're giving all the attention to one of the friends but they're kind of ignoring you. And you feel outside for that encounter with your friends. Or you make a promise to go out for coffee with a friend and they keep at the last minute saying, oh I gotta reschedule, sorry I can't make it. And they back out and back out. that's just 28 triggers. Don't know how many that you checked off. But my point was to help you realize wow I've got all kinds of things that trigger my shame. couple notes around that. You can see easily that some of those triggers are gonna be a lot more intense than others. Some are gonna take you from 0 to 100 in a nanosecond. Some are just gonna mildly annoy you. But there's a greater degree of intensity depending on the trigger and depending on who it is that triggers you. you need to factor that in. The next thing that is important is the intense triggers, they send you in a negative direction in a nanosecond. we often talk about when anger is triggered, you go to 0 to 100 in a nanosecond. Shame can be the same way. And you, can almost find it impossible to catch yourself from going to certain places in your thinking and certain behaviors. And we're gonna get to those in a minute. But I want you to understand the pull, the powerful pull that shame can have when it is triggered in an intense way. I talked about how often it is triggered. The next thing I say to clients is this. Once your shame is triggered, how long can you sit in it before you get into a really dark place? And for many people, it's not very long. Some, if they don't get out of that shame within a day or two, it is lights out. That's how powerful and that's how serious it can be. remember this. Part of why we're doing this is you become aware that the longer you stay stuck in shame, the darker it takes you in your head. The darker the place you go in your actions. And that is a very dangerous thing. now let me just run through a couple circumstances that trigger your shame. failure, where you've failed something, or you're in a situation and for the first time, you look back, you start to understand something, and you look back and you go, I can't believe how selfish I've been in this area all my life. I can't believe how hurtful I've been in my, in this area for years and years of my life. I can't believe the number of people I've hurt. And all of a sudden you just go , wow, I am a really big screw up. And you can go to shame. Forgetting to do something that you promised to do. Or not being the best at something. Do you realize that some shame-based people become hyper-competitive? They hate to lose. Not just because they're competitive, but because they don't want to lose because that triggers their shame. And it makes them feel less than. losing a contest can actually trigger your shame even if it's a fun contest. Or a game of cards that's just fun. Or a game of Monopoly. Where you want to kill everybody if you're not winning. that can be a big thing. Any public embarrassment. You slip and fall. Your zipper's done. You realize you got half your supper slopped down the front of you. Your collar's sticking up. And somebody points it out and you realize, I've been walking around all day this. And you just go to shame. We talked about when it takes longer than a minute to get others to learn a new skill. Some very practical ones. You'll get on the scale and you gained a couple pounds. Some of you go to shame. You look in the mirror and you got a new gray hair. And you go to shame. You look in the mirror and you got hairs growing out of your ears and nose. And you go, I hated that about my dad and grandpa and now I'm the same. And you can go to shame. Everybody's got the latest technology and you can't afford it. That can cause shame in some people. Not being able to do what others can do. Anytime that you're in stressful situations and you're starting to panic a little bit, you can go to shame because you go, I should know this by now. I should know how to do this. And you get down on yourself. Being with friends who have very behaved kids and your kid's running around he's crazy. You can go to shame and you go home hating yourself that you're a terrible person. Having to ask anybody for help can trigger your shame. Because then you're admitting you don't have it all together. And you're a burden you feel to other people. Revealing to somebody that you respect that you're struggling or revealing a secret. Do you want to know what happens when people start to get authentic and open up? They let out a great big juicy secret for the first time. And it feels good. Nobody judges them. And then they go home and they start thinking about it. And they go, I can never go back and face those people again. I bet you they all went home and it's broadcast all over Facebook now and they're talking about it. And they've all judged me. They were nice in the group but I'm sure the next time they see them they'll just avoid me and won't even talk to me. that can feel good but it can trigger shame. what I want you to understand with that is this. Growing and changing in healthy ways can actually trigger shame. And that's important to understand because what's going to happen when you take the steps to begin to heal and grow is you're actually going to trigger shame and that's going to make you want to pull back. And you've got to push yourself through that to keep on growing. Another one, somebody comes over for a visit and they didn't announce that they were coming and your house is a mess, your sink is overflowing with dishes and that triggers your shame. Or you get a family get together and brother one is a doctor, brother two is an engineer, brother three is a lawyer and what are you, a drug addict? Wow, this is a great family gathering. That just triggered your shame. Or you get with your friends and they're talking about all their kids are going to university and getting these really good jobs and they ask you what your kid's doing. They're in detox. And you go, oh my goodness. those are triggers. First time your kid gets in trouble. You've been working hard on yourself. You're trying to help your kids deal with their own trauma and you see growth in them and you think, this is going to work out . And then one night they come, one night, they have police call you and they say you got your son and they were smashed and they were doing all kinds of damage and that triggers your shame. Or your kids get really angry at you one day and they say I hate you and that triggers your shame. Or you see how your addiction affected your children. You start to understand their trauma and how you've messed them up and that can trigger your shame. that's quite a few things, eh? what happens when your shame gets triggered? , it triggers a whole bunch of other things. let me run through them and you can check off the things that happen with you. the first thing shame triggers is how we think. we can go from thinking in a healthy, very clear, good way. But once shame gets triggered, our thoughts become obsessive. we can go from thinking in a healthy, very clear, good way. But once shame gets triggered, our thoughts become obsessive. We spin and spin and we relive that event over and over and over again. We can't stop thinking about it. Or when we feel shame, we go back, I gotta hide. I gotta hide, let's lie. Or our thinking goes to telling ourselves lies and that is you're useless, you can't do anything , nobody's ever gonna want you and it's all distorted. But our thinking becomes telling ourselves all the lies about ourself. And then we can use our thoughts to beat ourself up. We can say you're useless over and over again, you're such a failure, you're never gonna amount to anything and we can play that tape day after day once our shame gets triggered. Other people, they just shut their brain down. And they go into offense. They go into fantasy world. And it's la la la, nothing's happened. I feel great, total denial. But they can go there or they can just refuse to think about it and distract themselves with activities. But what they don't realize is it's still operating below the surface at a subconscious level. Some in their thinking go to messages of hopelessness. What's the point of all this work? They get it. I might as just give up. This is useless. I'm too stupid. Let's throw in the towel now and quit. And you can go there when shame gets triggered and in severe cases you can go to, I am useless, why don't I kill myself? that can all happen. And you see there, there is not one positive thought. Every thought is negative. But what I want you to understand is it only makes the shame worse. It doesn't make it better. the solution that the brain has that I need to beat myself up, that I need to be hard on myself, I need to put myself in the doghouse because bad people need punishment, that's my justice system, that does not resolve it. It only makes the shame worse. you need to understand that. Now very quickly, what emotions do you go to besides the shame? we said that shame technically is a belief. It's not first an emotion, but we do have what we call a shame emotion where I have a feeling of not being good enough. With that usually comes anger at myself. shame turns into anger at myself and then often at the world and I just become more irritable. For others, shame causes greater anxiety. now I'm going around, what do people think of me? Do they think I'm stupid? Is everybody looking at me differently? Am I pretty enough? Am I smart enough? And insecurity after insecurity. And then when you go to be in a social setting, you get anxiety comes up, all because of shame. Some go to depression and they just get really down. Others go to guilt and others go to hopelessness. Do you see that? All negative emotions. shame has brought negative thoughts, negative emotions, and those start to feed each other and not in a good way. Some go to self-hatred. Some go to self-pity. And it's just poor me and let's have a pity party for a while. And then they go to the actions. How does that affect your behaviour? you might be starting to see some of your patterns. Patterns in your thinking, patterns in your emotions. It's the patterns in your actions that are also very important. Some begin to isolate. I can't face people now. I'm sure they all think I'm terrible. you avoid people and you avoid the things that you're doing. And you avoid the things that you're doing. You avoid people. You avoid social activities. You isolate. Do you want to know what isolation does to shame? It feeds it. Because now you only have your own thoughts to live with and your own self-hatred to live with. Some become very negative. When they're in shame mode, they become negative about everything. Nothing is good enough. They are critical. They focus on the negative. They lose all objectivity. And everything gets distorted in a negative way. Some go to childhood ways of dealing with shame. They might eat their feelings away. They might self-harm. They might sleep, whatever. They can do all those kind of things. Some immediately start putting masks back on. I can't let people see this. let's be happy all the time. Let's be super competent. Let's be a people pleaser. Let's change how people think of me. That doesn't work, but some do it. Many go, it doesn't bother me, even though it does. Some go to self-harm. And they can sabotage good things in their life once their shame is triggered. they start beating themselves up, and then they go, I don't deserve a good job, a good relationship. I don't deserve a good life. Let's sabotage everything. Others want to lash out not just at themselves, but anybody close. And when you're in shame mode, you usually hurt those closest to you. And you want to know what happens afterwards? That makes your shame and your guilt even worse. Some become busy with distractions. I don't want to feel. I just want to do. Some medicate, and shopping therapy is what some go to. When they're feeling shame, others start risk-taking behaviors. let's do something that flirts with destruction and see if it happens. Some, when they're in shame, can become very impulsive and make rash decisions. Some relapse. And what I said at the very beginning is this. I've never seen anybody stay clean and sober if they don't deal with shame. Because shame will ultimately, over a period of years, train you that the only way to deal with your shame is to drink or use and numb it out. if you think of your drinking and using, for many of you, it was a solution to shame. You didn't feel you belonged, you drank, and you felt you were part of the group. You felt socially awkward and shy, you drank, to be the life of the party. You were trying to solve your shame with drugs and alcohol. And your brain will still want to go back there today. And that's important to be aware of. , self-awareness. you can take that home. You can kind of map out your main shame triggers. And then you can see what you do in your thinking, emotions, and actions once your shame is triggered. And I don't give you this just you can say, now I know all of this about myself. No, I tell you this that now, once your shame is triggered, and all of a sudden you realize you're getting down on yourself, and you're starting to beat yourself up, you can go, stop that. And you can catch yourself before it progresses. Or you feel yourself saying, I can't face people, I'm going to isolate. You go, no, I'm going to force myself to go with friends that I know are safe, and I'm not going to give in to this shame impulse. this self-awareness is you can catch yourself before your shame gets too bad, and then it leads to a relapse. that might not have felt a pick-me-up, let's heal from shame solution. Next week's the pick-me-up. This week is, shame is becoming aware of shame. Healing from shame is becoming aware of shame I can stop my shame patterns. for the , I was thinking along this shame thing in light of the , and I'm thinking one of the dangers I think that people have as they begin dealing with their shame is they, without realizing it, still bring some of their old thinking into it. here's how the thinking goes. I feel useless, I feel less than, not good enough, inferior. what I should have happened once I start feeling good about myself is that then I should have a job that's a big job. Because if I'm a nothing person, then I get nothing jobs. If I get my shame fixed, and I realize I'm an important, valuable person, then I should have a great big, important, valuable job. But where their thinking goes then is to narcissist, I should be a president of a company, whatever. if I'm not doing something super big, then I must still prove that I'm not good enough. I want you to think about that with me tonight because it is such an important thing to think through. let me give you kind of how has described how his family operates. said to, He says, I am creating a family that I want to have change the world. they're going to put on display love, forgiveness, what healthy living looks . And that's going to attract people to say, I want to be part of that family. I want to be, have all of that in my life as . And He says, He calls that family, it's a human body. think about a human body. if you were saying, what part of the human body would I to be? Some of you say, I want to be an eye. Some of you say, I want to be a tongue because I want to talk all the time. Some of you, I want to be a brain. How many would sign up to be a lymph node or a vein? That's a dumb thing. That's, is it insignificant? You can't see it, but if you didn't have it, you'd be in big trouble. You don't see long lineups to become a gallbladder or a kidney. But what you realize is what the jobs that seem insignificant because they're hidden are just as important and maybe even more important than the job, the parts that everybody can see, that are beautiful. you might need a gallbladder more than you need an eye. All of those things are important to understand. what I want you to understand is this. You got all, you can just picture a bunch of addicts that become a human body and they're all voting saying, who's going to be the brain? Who's going to be the eye? Who's going to be the tongue? Who's going to be the nose? And they're having fights over who's going to be that. And then they're, who wants to be the nose? Who wants to be the little toe? And all of that. And they're fighting, I'm not going to be that. And you begin to realize, my shame is still running this discussion. My shame is wanting a big prestigious job to prove I'm a big shot and that I have value. And what I want you to think about tonight is that sometimes gives the greatest jobs to people who work behind the scenes Do you realize that you see me here on a Friday night? You don't realize the number of volunteers that make this happen. It wouldn't be able to happen without all of that. And sometimes the biggest responsibilities go to hidden people doing hidden jobs. They are just as important as the prestigious out front jobs and we need to understand that. to do a job that seems insignificant doesn't mean it is insignificant and it doesn't mean I'm insignificant. to help you understand that, I want to tell you the story of Moses' parents. who Moses is. He was the guy that led Israel out of slavery in Egypt and gave the Ten Commandments and became one of the greatest men in the history of Israel but also in the world. The Ten Commandments has become the basis of most of society's laws throughout the world. And Moses was a man who impacted the entire world not just his generation but all future generations. You want to know something? We don't even know his mom and dad's name. Think about that. There wouldn't be a Moses without a mom and dad and it wasn't a mom and dad who just gave him birth and left him. It was a mom and dad who invested into that little life behind the scenes. let me give you this story. Joseph was that guy that was sold by his brothers and they was taken to slavery in Egypt and then over a period of a number of years he went to become the second in command in Egypt and he, during a time of famine, came up with a plan that got him through the famine people didn't starve and they had enough food to feed all of the world. His brothers were in that famine up in Israel and they came down and Joseph saw them and then they moved down and he gave them a place in the delta for their sheep and it was a fertile place and it let them live kind of isolated and they were living in a place that was isolated from Egyptian culture that Israel was able to grow without being infected by a lot of the bad stuff of Egyptian culture. And over the next years they grew to be a nation of three million people. the Pharaoh that was part of Joseph and then after Joseph they died and a new Pharaoh came along who didn't know who Joseph was. All he knew is that they had three million people who were a threat because they weren't Egyptian they were a foreign people living in his land. And he felt threatened by them he decided to instigate a genocide and every baby boy born to a Jewish mom was to be killed. And he was going to wipe out the Jewish people by wiping out all the baby boys. And there was this one couple and they got pregnant. They were the Jewish slaves working as slaves didn't have birth control got pregnant and you can imagine the panic. Because the law is any baby boy born will be killed and they are freaking out. And somehow they're very close to and they have this sense that has allowed them to become pregnant because that baby in her womb is special. has a special plan for that baby. they instead of thinking how can we get rid of this baby it never comes to being born they go how can we protect this baby once it's born. And what they decide to do and you've probably heard the stories is they made this little basket out of bulrushes and they put tar around it would float in the night. And they put it in the Nile River and they went to a part of the Nile where there were lots of bulrushes and they stuck it and hid it in there. And then Moses had an older sister who was eight years old named Miriam and she hung around there all day to make sure nobody stole it and make sure it didn't float away or a crocodile didn't get it. And for several months this baby got put in the little basket every day and was hidden in the Nile River. Can you imagine how stressful that would be? Every day the mom and the dad are worrying are we going to is somebody going to find the baby today and report it and it will get killed? Will we get punished if it gets found and reported? Will they punish all the slaves are we doing something stupid here? But no we think 's told us to do this. they are just going through all of this. One day Pharaoh's daughter decides to have her bath in that part of the Nile River. And as she's bathing she hears a baby crying and she sends her servants to find out where's that baby crying coming from? And they look around and they narrow it down and finally they find this little basket and they bring it over to the daughter of Pharaoh and they open it up and they know that it's a baby Jew because it's been circumcised. And they go this is a Jewish baby. Now the daughter of Pharaoh knows she should have it killed but she falls in love with this little critter. And she says I want this baby. Miriam at that moment comes out and she acts oh what did you find? We found a baby and we need somebody to nurse it. And Miriam goes I know somebody that could nurse this baby. And the daughter of Pharaoh says please go find it. Miriam goes and gets her mom, Moses' mom and brings her along and says this lady could take care of this baby. And Pharaoh says he's all yours please take care of it. And for several years gave Moses back to them. And they got to invest their life into that little boy. Now can you imagine them going to a different place and going to a dinner party? Not that they would have them. But if they went to a dinner party and all the people are saying wow I just got a new job and I'm the head of this department and all of this. What are you doing Moses' mom? I'm just spending time with my boy telling him about . Teaching him how to tie his shoes. How to deal with other people. How to be honest. Wow that's a waste of time. That's not very significant. You could be doing something much more impactful on our world. No I think wants me to just invest in this little boy. I'm going to pursue my dreams. You do whatever you want. that is what is going on. At some point Moses gets taken from his true mom and gets moved into the palace with his adopted mom. And then 80 years later he becomes the leader of Israel and changes the world. let me get you to think about a couple things. In the we are told Amran and Jacobed. Now we are not sure if that is saying that is what his parents' names were because it is not clear. It is possible it is not who his parents are. It could just be a relative. the point is we don't know who Moses' parents are for sure. And the point of that is this. If you go back through history and I have done this in my own life. Do you realize that some of the greatest changes in our world came through hidden people? People that nobody noticed? Do you realize there is a little shepherd boy that nobody wanted and all his brothers thought he was kind of useless and they stuck him with the sheep? He changed the world. And then this Moses guy. And then there was this weird guy that was out in the desert. And he ate grasshoppers and ate honey and just lived this really weird life. He helped change the world. And you can go on and on and on. people who served in what seemed insignificant ways made huge impacts on our world today. do you realize that to serve in an insignificant way really requires a lot of ? Because you say, I'm trusting that you're in this and there's a point to what I'm doing. I'm trusting that it's somehow helping make out your plan to be what it wants. I don't see any results but I'm trusting. And that is what is required. And it is hard to serve in insignificant ways especially if you're not seeing immediate results. You want to know the thing about parenting? Moses' mother went through and father? You invest your life in these kids and you go, what kind of results are you seeing in your kids? Are they changing the world? No, they just learned to blow their nose by themselves. Wow, that's significant. Do when they start to make an impact on the world? After you've invested 20, 30 years in them. Then you start to see the impact. You start to see results. That means you go 20, 30 years of faithfully investing in them. Faithfully role modeling to them. Faithfully teaching them tools and helping them without seeing a whole lot of results. It is investment that you don't get a return on for a number of years. And that's how some of the work that asks us to do is to make a difference. Do you realize that most of the people that wrote the , they didn't know anybody would ever read what they wrote? David wrote some stuff just in his personal journal. He didn't think it would impact anybody. He didn't think it would help anybody. Now it has helped millions of people thousands of years later. They did not see immediate results during their lifetime. It was future generations that saw the benefits of what they did. And that we have to factor in. we've talked about sometimes huge doors swing on really small hinges. Sometimes world events swing on very small hinges. 99.9 of the world was totally aware of a slave in Egypt and her little baby. Nobody cared about that part of the world. Nobody cared about the Jewish people there. Nobody thought they would ever amount to anything. Everybody wrote them off as insignificant. But they weren't. And it wasn't until 80 years later that all changed. , my point. We aren't qualified to measure whether what we're doing is significant or not. Shame makes us want to think a lot of stuff is insignificant because we don't see immediate results and we don't see them in a big way. But what I want you to get from this story is we've got to rethink what having value in 's world means and sometimes calls us to what seems a significant hidden job that doesn't seem to have many positive results but it might. Maybe not in your lifetime. And we trust for that. , here's what I want you to understand. Big, big picture outside of this. let me take you away from Moses' parents. is wanting to raise up a leader to lead his people out of Egypt and he's wanting to change the world. How is he going to do that? He has to get somebody who understands Egyptian politics. Somebody that people in Egyptian politics would pay attention to. And they're not going to do that with just a Jewish person. how is he going to pull that off? Oh, bingo. Let's take a Jewish boy, have him adopted by Pharaoh's daughter he grows up in two worlds. And understands two worlds. And rubs shoulders in two worlds. Then, when I want to deliver Israel, he can march into Pharaoh's court and say, Grandpa, let my people go. I don't know if it's grandpa or not. But he could do that because he was known there. And that was what pulled off. In a magical, mysterious way. And , if you look at the people who changed the world, just take Paul, who changed the world. It's fascinating to me, he grew up a Jew in a Gentile world. he understood the Jewish world and the Gentile world. And he could bring the two together. You see that all over the place. if brought you up in a white home, but you're an indigenous person, you understand two worlds. Now maybe up to now, you have felt you didn't fit into either world. I'm sure Moses felt that way. But he understood both worlds. And had a purpose for that. And now, he could work in both worlds and bring them together. often takes people and makes them misfits, but they grow up in two worlds and through that can change a big part of the world. , I don't know what 's going to get you to do as you grow on in your recovery. I suspect some of you will become great spokespersons for . And you will have public roles I do. Some of you will work quietly behind the scenes. And you will never be noticed, but your job is just as significant. And I hope you can see that. Let me end with this. My mother just died, just over a month ago, in her 80's. My mom was shy, worse than I'm shy. My mom never, I never once saw her take a public role. I never once saw her teach, preach, in public, do anything that. My dad did all of that. She did all the organizing, budgeting, managing. She did a million jobs unseen by . Behind the scenes. You want to know when I was at the funeral? I said this, how do you measure greatness and godliness? Is it by great jobs and public eye? I said no. The greatest heroes to me, the most godly person I ever have known, is my mother. She never did anything in public. But she modeled for me a consistent love and faithfulness. She accepted me and connected with me when nobody else could. And she showed me 's love in a way nobody else did. was she significant? You bet she was. Did anybody else see it? No. And that's maybe what 's going to call you to. And I just hope you realize that doesn't mean you're insignificant in any way. Do we sleep together at your house anymore? I should have not got hungover. I would forget about you. We still have Box. I sleep at everyone's house. We sleep together at everyone's house,