tonight I want to start a new series on shame. And I want to just give you a little bit of why I want to do this series to get you're understanding where I'm coming from. Fifteen years ago when I started working in the addictions industry, I was asked by my boss to prepare a brand new workshop for the treatment center I was in on the subject of shame. And I didn't have a clue what it was, I read the books that were available on shame and I put together a workshop. The first time I taught it, I saw the impact it had on people coming out of addiction and trauma. And I thought, wow, this is a big topic. But I also saw that it was a super heavy topic. By the end of the workshop, people were having all kinds of memories stirred up by the stuff we were talking. They were feeling pain at a deeper level than they had felt for a long time. And for a lot of people, it just became too much. It was overwhelming for them. The second thing I noticed is that some of the people before the workshop started said, I don't have any shame. And I started asking clients at the beginning of the workshops from that time on, how much shame do you have? And most of them said, I don't have any shame. And by the end of the workshop, they're saying, I got all kinds of shame. And what I realized, it was a topic that people didn't understand and were very unaware of any of it in themselves. But it was once they became aware of it, they began to see how it affected every area of their life. And they began to realize that this was going to be one of the most important areas for them to deal with. If they were. Going to make it in recovery. that's part of why I want to do this series, because what I have seen since react started and three years ago yesterday react began and what I have seen is the week that we do on shame for many people is one of the toughest weeks, but one of the most important weeks of their time at react. it is a poorly understood issue. But it is a super important issue and nobody from complex trauma is free of shame. Everybody from complex trauma has some shame. we're going to start the series, but I want to put this out up front. This may stir up some very painful stuff. If it does, you have my permission to tune me out for a while. you don't get overwhelmed. I can't do all of the. Material and one night I can't give you all the tools for healing in this first night, but those tools will come in ensuing nights that we are spending on this topic. if you are feeling overwhelmed, feel free to just tune out for a little while. Now, what I want you to understand is shame by definition is not an emotion. It is a core belief about yourself. It is a core belief about who you think you are. There will be emotions that go with that, that we call shame emotions, but at its core, by definition, shame is a core belief about myself. Who am I? That is the question. And what shame means is I have a negative view of myself. I see myself as not having a lot of value, not being very lovable. Therefore, I see myself as not being good enough and therefore less than others around me. I would say 100 of people with complex trauma have some shame. The greater the complex trauma, the greater the shame. But everybody with complex trauma has some shame. In other words, complex trauma affects your core belief about your identity. And it makes it a negative thing. I want to develop that tonight and just kind of give you some groundwork to help you understand this concept that you can begin to see the shame in yourself. what I do when I teach this week at REACT is I say to the clients, think of times when you feel not good enough. Think of times when you feel not lovable, less than. How would you draw a picture of yourself at that moment in time? And they'll start giving me their answers, but usually they go along the lines. I wouldn't be able to look people in the eye. I'd be looking at the floor. Some go back to a childhood memory when they didn't feel good enough and they would want to curl up in a fetal position under their bed or in a closet because they just felt terrible about themselves. Others, I then say, What color is your drawing done in? And you realize that about 95 of the time the people say it's black and white. There's no color in their shame drawing of themselves. And that to me is significant because it's almost to their mind that shame takes the color out of life. And it makes it a very dull color where you live in a black and white. It makes it a very low color where you live in a black and white because it's black and white. And it makes it a very low color where you live in a black and white. white, pleasureless world when you have shame. Another characteristic of people with shame, and I will sometimes ask this, is are you able to look yourself in the eye when you look in the mirror? And many people with shame are not able to look at themselves in the eye when they look in the mirror. Some don't even look in a mirror because they can't stand to do that. Others, when they look in the mirror, never look at themselves in the eye. They either look at themselves from the nose down or from the eyebrows up because that is what shame does. You don't yourself because you feel you don't have value. You don't feel good enough. therefore, you don't yourself. , now I take clients to this. Every child at a subconscious level comes into the world asking, certain questions. Number one, who am I? What is my personality? What am I good at? And then, am I lovable? Do I have any value? Do people want to be with me? Do people me? What do I have to offer that would make people interested in me? they are asking those questions at a subconscious level. And then it's not just do people love me, but do they desire me? Do they, when they look at me, not just love me out of obligation, but do they, do their eyes light up and they get excited about spending time with me? what all of those express, those subconscious questions, are deep longings and desires built into every human being. I want to be desirable. I want to have value. I want to be lovable. I want somebody to want a relationship with me. All of those questions are asked at a subconscious level. then I say, how do we get the answer to those questions? I use a metaphor. If a child wants to know who they are externally, what they look , they look in the mirror. I say, use that metaphor. If a child wants to know who they are on the inside, their personality, if they have value, if they're lovable, there are mirrors that reflect back to them the answers to those questions. And those mirrors begin with mom and dad. what mom and dad say to you, how they treat you, their attitude towards you, mirror back to you whether you have value and whether you're lovable. If you take that to a healthy home, a child growing up with healthy parents, what reflection do they get when they look at mom and dad? They get the constant, consistent message, you have great value. You don't have to do anything. You have value inherent within you. You are lovable and we are committed to unconditional love to you. a child growing up in that environment, they have a positive self-image. They feel good about themselves. They don't have thousands of insecurities because they know who they are. They know their place, their value, all of that. When you come to complex trauma, the mirror says a negative message. In a healthy home, positive messages come from the mirror. Complex trauma, negative messages. I wanna go through a list of things that mom and dad can do or say to you that mom and dad can do or say to you that mom and dad can do or say to you that they can do. , mirror back to you messages about who you are. , and many of you, this is gonna start stirring up memories for you because many of these you will have experienced. Some of you have gone through, you shared your opinion with mom and dad and they laughed at you. In other words, you got the message you're stupid and that was reinforced in a whole bunch of different ways. Some you got eye rolling when you shared stuff. Some you got eye rolling when you shared stuff. Sometimes people just start walking away from you because it was you're dumb, I don't wanna listen to that. And you internalize that message. Next, belittling. Some of you heard you'll never amount to anything. Some heard you'll never do anything . You can't do anything . You're a failure. You'll never be more than just a failure. And those were expressed to you on regular basis. Now, some of you have said, mom and dad only said that when they were angry. They didn't say that when they were in a good mood. And what I say to clients is this, if you're really honest, what you're trying to say is that didn't impact me because I knew they were angry. But be honest with yourself. Did it impact you? Yes. Because sometimes when people are angry, you think they take away all their filters and they speak what they really believe. And you believe what they say in anger. And you can see your son calm down. You see your mind useful because you believe in . You see your heart innocent because you only have a fewing thoughts, that long life apart. When they say having anger, you see that they believe in , and all of a sudden, what does that eventually end up with? It leads them to call out their first colours in a very hurtful manner. Some of thoughts could turn into a photo card. There was a statistic where many of us just, maintained side administrative attorneys. What's that do? They just give us a photo card. things you got i'm not good enough and then you might have got a mother or a father that no matter how you did something it never was quite good enough they would find something wrong with it something to criticize if you came home with a fantastic report card straight a's except for one b they wouldn't congratulate you about the straight a's they go why did you get a b and it was the straight a's didn't mean anything to them they focused on what you didn't do perfectly and that sent a message to you some of your parents compared you why can't you be your brother why can't you be your cousin and that sent a message that you're not good enough others parents blamed you for their problems we fight as a couple because you're not good enough a bad kid. I drink because you're a bad kid. And you made, you were made to feel that it's my fault. My parents are struggling or it's my fault. They're getting a divorce. I must be really bad. And you internalize that. Some of you were not allowed to express certain emotions. You're told you're too sensitive. You cry too much. You're too sad. You're always moping around. You're too angry. Nobody to be around you. And you were made to feel that because of you having those emotions, something's wrong with you. You're not good enough. And then, sometimes parents made promises to you that they broke and if they did that repeatedly, you began to feel, wonder if they're breaking the promise because they really don't want to be with me. And you internally, you realize that in a negative way. Now, on the flip side of that is you get children who are spoiled or who have no rules. And people ask me, how could they ever have shame? They just got all kinds of gifts. They had everything given to them. Here's what I've been told by spoiled kids over the years. Number one, my parents tried to buy my love. Instead of giving them what they wanted, they gave them what they wanted. Instead of giving them what they wanted, they gave them what they wanted. And give them what they wanted just because they wanted to be with other kids. Two, I'm proud of my parents for not giving me something too much in return. They gave me gifts I would them. And I wanted to connect with them but I got a gift instead. And I felt something was wrong with me why they had to buy me off with gifts. Second, why did nobody care enough about me to say no? If they really cared about me, they would have said no to some of the stuff. The fact they never said know makes me feel that I don't matter, that I'm not cared for. And that sends a negative message. We always talk about the four environments of complex trauma. neglect, parents who meet your physical needs but aren't there emotionally for you, that sends a message to you that something must be wrong with you. That's why they don't want to connect emotionally to you. Or you try to connect and you hit a wall and you conclude what's wrong with me. Then you might have come from a family where it was all about image. at home everybody hit each other and yelled at each other and fought. As soon as you went out in public, be polite. Treat me with respect. Don't have a hair out of place. Look good. And you began to feel, I'm just a trophy on dad's arm. I'm just here to make him look good. I'm not here because I matter for me. I'm here because it's all about him. And that sends a shame message to you. If you're not nurtured or your needs aren't met consistently, we talk about that all the time. Some of you grew up in a family where you weren't valuable to you. Some of you grew up in a family where you weren't valuable to you. Some of you grew up in a family where you weren't valuable to you. Some of you grew up in a family where you weren't , validated for what you did . Some of you might have come up from a family where you were told, we're not going to tell you about all the good stuff you did because we don't want you to get a big head. we're not going to say anything positive about you. But we all need validation. And if you don't get validation, you begin to go, what's wrong with me? Next one, abuse, any type of abuse, the child takes the message, what's wrong with me that they're hitting me? It's got to be my fault. Why are they saying those nasty things to me? I must not be good enough. abuse sends one of the loudest, mere messages that something is wrong with you. And then abandonment, in my mind, sends the greatest shame message. if you think of the two people that gave you life, mom and dad, biological parents, if they don't want you and get rid of you, what does that say about you? If the two people who are to naturally have a built-in love for their offspring don't want you, that must mean you're a zero. And that nobody will want you if they get to know you. abandonment sends the heartache. I'm going to go ahead and read the first part of this. The first part is the most precious, deepest, most painful shame message. Conditional love is another one. Some days you're showered with love. Other days they withhold love, and you feel it's your fault. Shame-based parenting, that's when mom always is going, shame on you, shame on you, shame on you. She thinks it's going to motivate you to do better. But if that's all you hear, you're not going to get the message. You begin to believe you're just a screw-up. And it begins to be your belief system. A subtle one, and I want to go into a couple subtle ones now. Your parents' value system affects how you see yourself. ? if mom is all about still looking a 30-year-old when she's 50, you are getting a loud value message that says, women only have value if they're a great sex object. And that can come through loud and clear. Secondly, if dad is obsessed with his car, and it is his baby, and you can't sit in it, if you've got the speck of dirt on you, then you go, that car matters more than me. His value system is a fancy car. Where do I fit in? And that sends a message. If you grew up in a family where there's a really good work ethic, but it goes a little bit too far, and it says you're only worth something if you can hold down a job all the time, and then you get sick and you can't work, and you go on disability, and you go, I'm a loser. I have no money. I have no money. I have no money. I have no value now. parents' value systems are very important in figuring out shame messages. Subtle ones. Do you realize I'm told that about 10 of children have bed wetting problems. After they've been toilet trained, they will still wet their bed at night. What I understand is when you get to addicts, about 20 of addicts had bed wetting problems. And that's because they're not aware of their own problems, even later than just a couple years. And it was a source of great embarrassment, often the source of a lot of shame and ridicule within the house, and that sent a very painful message to the child. Another one is if you grow up in a poor family in a more affluent area, and you go to school and all the kids have new clothes and you're wearing hand-me-downs. All the kids have their latest shoes and the latest cell phones, and you don't even have a cell phone and you're wearing your brother's old shoes with holes in them. You start to feel less than all the time, not just in the family, but in culture in general. If you come from a different ethnic culture, your family moved, let's say, from Syria as a refugee, or your parents came from a different country, or your parents came from the war when you were little and you didn't know English, you didn't know the culture, you didn't dress Canadians, that was a very hard thing and it can send a shame, not good enough message. Final really subtle one is this. We don't have this a lot anymore, but 50 years ago it was not uncommon for families to have 8 to 12 children, some even had up to 15 children, and they were not allowed to wear their clothes. And it was a very painful message to hear. And I think that's what we need to do. And what happened to the youngest children is the old ones parent, oldest children parented them. And it wasn't that mom and dad didn't want to neglect their children, they just had too many kids to give all the attention that those kids needed. And a child can feel neglected. With that, if you grew up with a sibling who was sick, mom and dad give all of their attention to that sick child and you feel neglected. They're not intending to send a shame message, but you're perceiving that you're not good enough. those are all subtle shame messages. Now let me add one more piece, ? In a healthy home, parents make a distinction with a child. Number one is who they are, number two is what the child does. a child may do wrong things, a child may do kid things, spilling their milk. And the parent says, regardless of what you do, you are still valuable and we love you for who you are. We might not what you do, but we love you. ? In a complex trauma family, what happens more frequently is you did something bad, therefore, you are bad. that distinction isn't made between what you do and who you are. And now, we're going to talk about the child. Now, if you grew up in that, as soon as you do something bad in your mind, even if it's spilling your milk, you beat yourself up and go, I'm a loser. And that comes out of that lack of distinction between what I do and who I am. , if that's not bad enough, I'm going to keep going. that was just home life. Oh, I should add one other piece. Another piece to the home life. What can happen in some families is mom and dad aren't the problem, is you have a sibling who's older and stronger than you, and they abuse you, they say cruel things to you, and they say if you ever tell mom and dad, this is going to happen to you. They threaten you. That in itself can send shame messages because now you're in pain. You're getting all of this stuff. Bombarding you and you got to keep it a secret. And it can do its damage. If you go outside of the family, let's go to our culture. And let's look at our culture as a mirror that reflects to young people today messages about themselves or, to put it another way, they set a standard for what normal is. what is normal? what is the standard of Hollywood? You're really popular if you got a perfect body and a perfect face. what does that say to 90 of our culture today? Young girls coming up, especially when they watch Disney movies and Hollywood, they feel less than. They feel not good enough because Hollywood set a standard for what every girl should attain to as being their normal. Also, if you look at Hollywood, who is it that gets the greatest following and makes the most money? Sports stars, music stars, actors and actresses, people with popularity and a great skill or people that are very wealthy. what are we telling people is the normal? You got to be rich, pretty, and you got to be really, really good looking. You got to be really, really good looking. And you got to be really, really good at either singing, sports, or acting. Otherwise, you're less than. And that reinforces messages that they might already have gotten in home. Now let's go to one more mirror. School. And school actually is two mirrors. Number one, school just as an institution, what does it say is the normal standard of a normal child? You have to be smart. let's say you have a child that works their very hardest, and the best they can ever get is a B-. What does our culture say to that child? You're not quite good enough. And we can end up with a system that is very necessary and very helpful, but it can actually reinforce shame to certain people. And then if you go outside of just the curriculum, and the school institution, to the other students, what do you get as a standard from them? Who are the popular kids? The ones with the great body, the ones who are good in sports, the ones with a car already, the ones that can throw a party, the outgoing ones. And if you don't meet that standard, you're not quite good enough. And then you get the bullies. And that's the other mirror. The people who are stronger than other kids, who put them down on a regular basis. what I want you to see from this is that your home is the most powerful mirror, but there are also other mirrors that will affect a child's self-perception, and their sense of who they are, and whether they're good enough. And sadly, we live in a culture where most of the messages the average child is getting is, I'm not good enough. And that is a tragic reality of what we live in today. I'm going to take you then, what does that do to a child? What emotions does that then create when they're made to feel not valuable, not lovable, not good enough? , you can imagine there's pain. Lots of it. There's fear. Will anybody want me? Will anybody respect me? And they have a lot of anxiety now. As they make friends, a lot of insecurities are now there. Many, with shame, become depressed because they don't themselves. Life sucks. They hate themselves. They are very hard on themselves. Some begin self-harming behaviors because they hate themselves much. They find out there's a lot of anger in there. They're jealous. They're jealous of anybody that has more attention than them. They're envious of what everybody else has. They get very negative about themselves and everybody else. And they're very discontent. And for some, they get to a place where they feel hopeless. I am a total screw-up. I don't see any way out of this. What's the point? what I want you to understand is shame does nothing but produce negative emotions and powerful negative emotions. Not mild ones, but powerful ones. And the emotional world of a shame-based person is predominantly negative emotions. And that is a difficult thing to live with because what happens with shame is you don't know how to fix it. You find no way to resolve it, there's no way to resolve the negative emotions. But let me add one more piece here. what happens to a child is if I do something that's below the standard, ? let's say I go to school with a big pimple. I am going to be made to feel ugly, and that'll feed my shame, but it won't stop there. I'm going to get teased. I'm going to get a new nickname. I'm going to get made fun of. And shame isn't just a package all by itself. Shame also has other emotions or other things that people do to you that hurt. pain doesn't just end, or shame doesn't just end with shame. Shame leads to more pain. Nothing good comes out of shame. , I'm going to take you a little bit longer here, but I want you to understand how our brain tries to solve shame. in the middle is the real self, ? Now if you're told through the mirrors that your real self is no good, that you're less than, that you're not lovable, you develop the gray area outside of that, the other circle, which is the shame-based self, and that's the critic. And the critic is now in your brain that's constantly saying, you're not good enough. And it puts yourself down, and it's very negative towards yourself. , that's there, but there's still a part of you that says, I want to be loved. I want to be respected. How do I do that? only solution is this. I can't show them my real self because they'll reject me and abandon me mom and dad. I have to. I have to do the third circle, a persona, and that's the mask that you start to wear. If I act this way, maybe people will me. If I act this way, maybe people will respect me. now you have a third person. You've got the real self, the critic self, and now the personas that you wear. But then you got a fourth circle that says, if only I was this. The ideal self in your mind, that if you were this, you would be perfectly happy. Everybody would love you. Everybody would respect you. It's a fantasy, but it's in your thinking. If only I was this, all my problems would be solved. Now here's the problem. You got that critic person? Guess what it's constantly doing? It's comparing you to the ideal self, which is an unrealistic standard. You're never going to attain it. it compares what you're doing day by day with this ideal self, and what's the conclusion it's drawing? You're not good enough. what you just have in your brain is a system now that looks it's solving your shame, but it's actually reinforcing your shame. You think you're finding a way to feel better, but the critic says, oops, you didn't meet the mark. You failed. Oops, you didn't meet it. You failed. You're this terrible less than person. And shame starts to feed off itself. I want you to think of your parents up at the top, you underneath that, and your parents are being neglectful, critical, abusive, all the things that we just described. what is happening is you got the yellow square of the brain, ? as you grow up with your parents, your parents are giving you these messages, and what are you doing? You're filing them away in your brain. As you get older, you don't even need your parents to say anything anymore when you do something. Your brain just says, you loser, and they repeat all the things that your parent said. your parents once criticized you, but guess what happened as you grew up? You took your parents and stuck them into your brain, we call it an internal parent is now in your brain, and it's a critic. regardless of what you do, it will never be good enough to your brain. it's another way that shame sets up systems to prevent you from ever escaping shame because now you have your parents living in your head, judging everything you do with a shame message. Another way to understand that is as you grow up as a child, your parents said you're too sensitive. you say, I hate that about myself. And you say, I wish I could just find a way to cut that out of myself and throw it away. you say, I'm just going to shut that part of me down and never be sensitive again. I hate that about myself. And then a little while longer, you're angry nobody to be around you. Oh, now you, I hate my anger. I wish I could just get rid of my anger. And you shut that part of yourself down. Over time, guess what's happening? You're hating more and more of yourself. You're wishing you could take those parts, shut them away in a closet, and never have to do it again. You're going to have to deal with them again. you are taking your parents' messages and now you're shaming yourself. You're keeping it going. And that's the challenge with shame. Final thing and then we'll end. What's the difference between shame and guilt? Very important question. Guilt is about what you do. Shame is about who you are. Guilt is about actions. Shame is about identity. Guilt is actually a wonderful system where we have this thing called a conscience that if we do something that violates love, we feel pain. if we tell a lie, if we cheat somebody, cheat on somebody, steal, something bugs us. That's guilt. It was designed to be a good system that was designed to be a good system to say, are you in enough pain yet to smarten up and change your behaviour? To get back to telling the truth, to being honest. guilt's a wonderful system to correct unloving behaviour and make it loving again. guilt is resolvable. Shame is not resolvable. It is saying you're not good enough and there's nothing you can do about it. You just have to live with that identity and all the emotions you feel around that identity. shame is the problem area because you can't find a way to fix it. Now I've got to add false guilt because in complex trauma families, your conscience was often misguided or miseducated. dad was saying, you're selfish for wanting to play baseball and you go, it's wrong to play baseball, bad me. That's a misguided conscience but now you feel guilt every time you want something. And part of recovery is learning true guilt from false guilt. , final thing. Once you have a lot of shame and then you do something wrong, you get guilt, ? But what does guilt do now? I did something bad, I am bad. guilt now feeds shame. if you've got lots of shame, I don't feel good enough, I'm bad, I'm not lovable, you steal from somebody, you feel guilt, but then you go, oh, that just proves how bad I am. those feed each other. I knew going into shame was going to be a little bit of a pick me up because it is such a heavy topic. I thought I would tell you some stories from the about screwed up people and how viewed those people to just help you understand that just because you have shame doesn't mean 's going to put you on the shelf or that doesn't see you as having value. And that's the fear of a lot of people with shame. And the fear of a lot of people with shame is that nobody else seems to value me. Probably doesn't value me. Or yes, loves me, blah, blah, blah, I get that. But I don't think passionately desires me or delights in me. I want to start with a story that you've probably read and maybe have thought that you kind of got it. But I want to give you a bit of the cultural history and you're going to see this story come alive. It's about when chose his disciples. you remember at the beginning of his at 30 years of age, he picked 12 people to follow him, which became known as the 12 disciples and later the apostles. it says, One day as was walking along the shore of the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Peter and Andrew, throwing a net into the water for they fished for a living. called out to them, follow me, and I will show you how to fish for people. And they left their nets at once and followed him. A little further up the shore, he saw two other brothers, James and John, sitting in a boat with their father, repairing their nets, and he called them to come too. typically what we would visualize when we see that is how we would interpret saying, come follow me. And we would simply think, we're supposed to follow along behind him and see where he's going today. But that term was a very technical term. And when you understand it, you're going to see this begin to become alive. at that time in the Jewish culture, everybody went to school, and part of what they had to learn in school was they had to memorize the first five books of the . that's Genesis to Deuteronomy. And if you've ever read that, that would be a project to memorize. Now if you are a really, really keen student, you would memorize the entire Old Testament, all 39 books. That's just a massive accomplishment. As a child was getting to the point of graduation, some things would happen. First of all, the most respected rabbis, and rabbis were kind of the main religious teachers. They would come to the schools looking for the brightest, most capable students. And once they had interviewed students and talked to teachers, they would go up to what they considered to be the most brightest student, and they would say, follow me. And what that meant was, this is now going to be your life. From now on, you're going to spend time learning everything I know, and becoming me in character, that when I'm gone, you can keep it going. follow me meant sign up the rest of your life to follow me, to learn and then teach what I'm teaching. It was a life commitment. Now you can imagine that the top rabbis wouldn't pick all the students. They only pick the very select, brightest students. there's still a whole bunch of other students that weren't picked. that takes to the second option available, is that the kids graduating, they could go to the other rabbis in their villages and around, and they would go to them and say, could I follow you? In other words, would you consider taking me on as your disciple to train me that I can eventually do what you're doing? they would go to all the other rabbis, and a number of them would get picked, but still not everybody was picked. Only the brightest, and then the next brightest who the rabbis liked. what was the option for the people that weren't picked? They went back to their father's business and worked for their dad. Did you notice when I read to you about Peter, Andrew, James, and John, who were they working for? Their dad. What does that say about Peter, Andrew, James, and John? Nobody else wanted them. They were the rejects. They were the ones that weren't good enough. Isn't it interesting that didn't go to the top students and say, will you follow me? He went to the ones nobody else wanted. He picked from the reject pile. there's hope for all of us. But we're not done. He didn't just pick those four fisherman guys. He picked a guy named Matthew. Now Matthew was a tax collector. And if you're in Canada, you don't kind of Revenue Canada bugging you when you do your income taxes. But you don't lose a ton of sleep necessarily over a tax collector. But in that culture, tax collectors were the most hated people in their culture. Because what happened was, if you got the license to be a tax collector, you had to go to Rome, who was considered the enemy of Israel. And basically you had to get in bed with Rome and pay Rome and give Rome some of your money and engage in Rome's domination of abusing Israel. And if they gave you a license, you could set up your little office on the street corner. what you could do, let's say, you were going to be able to put a tax on the amount of fish that a person caught. But here's what tax collectors did. They were greedy and Rome really didn't care how they abused their own people. they said, I'm going to make a new thing to tax. I'm going to start taxing the number of wheels you have on your cart. you got two wheels. Oh, you got four wheels. You're going to get taxed even more. And then they kept making taxes up that the people of Israel were putting more and more of their profits into paying tax collectors and they were getting poorer and poorer. And there was nothing they could do about it because Rome was supporting these tax collectors. they became the most hated men in Israel, but they were also considered the most dishonest people and the most evil thieves around. Men with zero character, men who had no regard for human beings, total narcissists, total greedy people. they were not allowed to go to . They would have security people saying, not allowed. And they were banned from and religious activities. They were considered untrustworthy and greedy and corrupt that they weren't allowed to testify in court because they could be bought off and give false testimony very easily. they were not allowed there. They were classified as the lowest in society. In fact, they taught that would never forgive a tax collector and that he was happy when tax collectors died. Guess who picked? A tax collector. Somebody that was not supposed to forgive, but forgave. Somebody that was supposed to get happy when they died, but wants them on his team. , next one. Simon the Zealot. In that culture, they had these daggers. And these men, Simon the Zealot, was part of what was known as the group that carried daggers. It was a gang. he was a gang member. And what these guys did is they're saying, Rome is corrupt. All of our people who are in politics are corrupt. We're going to have to take the law in our own hands. And we're going to have to do kind of vigilante justice here. they walked around with a dagger under their robe. And if they saw a Roman soldier standing there with no other Roman soldiers, into the heart. If they got a tax collector by himself, they killed him. Guess who picked? A gang member who was a murderer. But did you notice? Zealots killed tax collectors. And said, Simon, Matthew, you're on the same team now. Get along. Two people that hated each other and feared each other. And then he picked those two, James and John, the fishermen. But they had a nickname. When called them, they were known as the son of thunder. Now in the language of that day, when you were called the son of something, what that meant, you were totally it. It was that was your dad and you were the splitting image or the spitting image of that thing. what does it say? James and John are the spitting image of thunder. What do you think that's trying to say about James and John? I think it's saying they had an anger problem. They walked around a storm cloud ready to rain on anybody's parade and make a whole lot of noise doing it. if you look at 12, there's only one person that was educated. Judas Iscariot. And he betrayed to death. The other 11 were in the ranks of the losers of society. Gang members, murderers, tax collectors, guys that had to work for their dad because nobody else wanted them. And picks losers. Isn't that good news for us? I always say to people in 1 Corinthians, Paul says that put his glory in a crowd. It is open. , when did you get here? When was the first time you put your glory in the light? Wow! the light out and what is saying is i have all of this greatness i want to put on display to the world i got to pick me a vessel to display my greatness how am i going to do that it's got to be a cracked pot that's when my light can shine out of crack pots and i get all the glory and the crack pots don't walk around saying look how great i am because i'm shining this light now everybody's saying you're cracked you're a mess you're broken and says that's the ones i love to use because then my light can shine through and nobody gets confused about who the source of that light is next thing baptism at baptism here's what happens went to the galilee to the jordan river to be baptized by john after his baptism as came out of the water the heavens were open and he saw the spirit of descending a dove and setting on him and a voice from said this is my dearly beloved son who brings me great joy now let me give you the context of that in that culture at age 12 a boy would have a bar mitzvah and i've actually been to bar mitzvah it's a celebration of a boy moving from childhood to manhood. It was when a father presented his son to the world as a man. And he would stand beside his son and he'd say, this is my son. I am very pleased with him. He's dearly loved. And he would put his son on display and they would celebrate it. Now I want you to think about what happened in that culture. If you were a bastard child, if you were born out of wedlock, if your mom had an affair and got pregnant, they would not throw a bar mitzvah for a bastard child. What was considered to be? A bastard child. In John 8, the rumor, we're told the rumor going around is that Mary had an affair with a Roman soldier. That's how she got pregnant because they knew it couldn't have been by Joseph because they knew his character, but she was pregnant. they had to explain it. And they weren't saying the made her pregnant. They're saying she had an affair. That is a bastard child. it is very, very possible, very likely that grew up and never had a bar mitzvah where his father stood beside him and said, this is my son. I love him dearly. what does do? He turns 30 years old. He has his baptism and from says, this is my kid. And I am proud of him. Now, hang on to that thought because I'm leading somewhere with that. I want you to think of how that applies to us. In Roman culture, they had a different term for a bar mitzvah and it was called an adoption ceremony. adoption in that culture wasn't necessarily bringing a child from another family who wasn't wanted into your family. That's how we define it. it's a different term. It's a different term. It's a different term. It's a different term for adoption. It's a different term to what adoption ceremony is. It's an adoption ceremony. And for example, if you had an adoption, that wasn't what adoption ceremony was. This was an adoption ceremony for your biological son where you announced that he had become a man and you were giving him all the of manhood. It was a public declaration of how proud you were of your son, just the bar mitzvah. ? decided to adopt us into his family by bringing us to himself through . This is what he wanted to do and it gave him great pleasure. , with us, we have two types of adoption. First, we're brought from a family into 's family. We're adopted that way. We understand that but then we're adopted a bar mitzvah and takes us unwanted, broken by other people, people that are cracked pots and messed up. He brings us into his family but he doesn't just tolerate us. He stands beside us and he says, this is my kid and I sure love them and I am proud of them doesn't just tolerate us. He doesn't just treat us , I'll put up with you but you sure are a pain. He says, man, if you knew how crazy I was about you, even though nobody else wanted you, even though you were without a family, even though you were super messed up, I already did it with my disciples. Now, I'm going to bring you into my family but I'm going to show you how to show you off and I want you to know and everybody to know that you are passionately loved and that is the greatest healer of shame is to finally have a mirror in my life that is accurate and that sends the message that is true. I value. I am dearly loved. I don't care what others say. I just care what he says. That's what I base my value on.