shame. what we did in the very first night is understand that shame is a core belief about myself. It's a belief about my identity. And that belief is a negative belief that something's wrong with me. I'm not good enough. I don't feel lovable. I don't feel that I have any value just for being me. I feel inferior, less than is my normal default setting. And we developed what that meant, where it came from, and that for basically every person from complex trauma, they end up with shame. Because once they are neglected or abused or abandoned or their needs aren't consistently met, they conclude it's their fault. I must not be good enough. That's why I'm being neglected and abused. There must be something wrong with me. That's why I'm being neglected and abused. they develop this developing self-concept that is all negative. What I want to do tonight is go into the next part of where does the brain then go once it's reached this conclusion that I'm not good enough. And what I want you to understand up front is this is all happening at a subconscious level. This isn't you sitting down consciously. I think I'm no good. What am I going to do about it? This happens in the mind of a small child at a subconscious level. the first thing that you have to understand is the conclusion that comes is not just that I'm not good enough, but there's a second conclusion, which is if the two people that brought me into the world have concluded that I'm not good enough, therefore I can be neglected or abandoned or abused. That means that anybody that gets to know me is going to abandon me or abuse me or neglect me. I can't have that happen. And with shame develops a fear of abandonment. And fear becomes the main emotion that trumps everything else. But at a subconscious level, and it's I can't stand the pain of being abandoned, but I'm afraid of being abandoned. I'm afraid if people get to know me, they'll abandon me again. And that scares me to death. what am I going to do to never be abandoned? that's where the brain starts to go. the first conclusion is I must hide who I am. Because if they see the real me, they will abandon me. priority number one in my life must be to hide the real me. But the second priority is to hide who I am. And I'm afraid of being abandoned. And I'm afraid of being abandoned. But the third priority is I don't want to walk around feeling I'm a nobody. I have to somehow compensate for that feeling that I at least feel I have some value. And then from that comes two other priorities. Though I feel I'm not lovable, and though I feel I'm not valuable, I long to be loved. And I long to be respected or to have people treat me as if I have value. here's what begins to happen. I want love and respect, but I must stay hidden. how can I get love and respect without people getting to know the real me? And that becomes the challenge for the brain with a person with shame. And what I want to do tonight is develop that for you that you begin to see what the brain is trying to solve, what solutions it comes up with, and then I want to go to the next step. go into some of the ramifications of the solutions the brain comes up with the brain develops solutions that it thinks are going to fix the problem but it's limbic brain stuff it just makes things feel a little bit better but it makes things worse in the long run here are some of the very early adaptations or solutions the brain proposes for the shame thing how to get love and respect but remain hidden number one never be vulnerable never be authentic never let people see the parts of you that would make you weak don't let them see you cry because then they might look down on you don't let them see you sad because then they might think less of you now you have to hide those weak emotions not just your personality but those emotions that can creep out and then once there are people might think less of you that's the first solution with that you then put on mass they can't see the real me I need to present to them something that they will or respect I have to do an act or a role that they will say wow I that person I want to be with her that person and you become a mask wearer some of you relate to being a chameleon you wear a mask a different mask for each person you meet how to adjust your behavior to get this person to you and how to make a different adjustment to get this person to you're very good at wearing masks we teach about the roles that children develop as they grow up you talk about the hero and the jester and the invisible child and the scapegoat child i want you to think those about those roles in terms of shame because one of the purposes of those roles is not just to help the family have less pain it's to provide a solution to shame the hero child says they can't see the real me mom and dad because they will reject me they will neglect me i will be a hero i will be super responsible i will never cause problems i will do extra chores i will be cooperative with everything they want i will never rebel i will help out then mom and dad will love me and respect me the child is trying to get love and respect within the family while hiding what they think are defects the second child is that invisible child that says i don't want to be a burden to mom and dad that's why they don't me that's why they abuse me and neglect me i will have zero needs i will never ask for anything i will never share with them my dreams or desires or wants because then i might be a burden i have to somehow fade into the wallpaper and then i'm going to be a burden and have zero needs or desires then maybe mom and dad will say that's a good kid and they will respect me and love me still trying to solve shame then the jester child or the comedian says i will hide behind humor people won't see the real me mom and dad will never see the sad parts of me the parts of me that are painful and might be a burden to them laugh all the time I'll make them they're always wanting to be with me and have me around because I just make life fun and enjoyable and everybody's happy trying to solve their shame that is one way to look at the roles another thing that happens naturally in the brain is this if I am perfect people will love me and respect me if I please everybody people will love me and respect me I won't let them see the real me I will just be a perfectionist or people pleaser and then I'll get the love and the respect that I long for and you see the flaw in this you get immediate love and respect but what goes on in your head you go you're being a phony if they knew the real you they would have been a fool if they knew the real you they would have been a fool and be loving you and respect you this whole thing is getting you love and respect and it feels good but it doesn't satisfy because it's an act and that becomes the problems of this another solution the brain proposes is I must lie about who I really am I must lie about things that I do that I think might get me judged I must keep secrets about struggles I have and I must keep secrets about the things that I do that I think might get me judged I must keep secrets about struggles I have and I must keep secrets about struggles I have failures I have because I have to hide and to hide effectively I have to become a good liar and I have to become a good secret keeper again you can see that might work in getting people to you and respect you but it sure isn't going to make a healthy relationship down the road if you keep lying and keeping secrets all the time it's gonna backfire sooner or later other people say I will build walls around my heart some people isolate geographically who wants to risk relationships with people when you got shame because you they're gonna find you out eventually I'm not even gonna go there I'm gonna have zero relationships I'm gonna become an isolator some do that not many but some do others say I want to be with people but I'm gonna isolate by creating walls and what they do is they let you in a little bit but then you can just feel you bump into a wall and they're not gonna let anything further about them they're not gonna let the relationship go any deeper you can bang your head against that wall all you want but they are not going to let you in they're isolating behind walls others say my internal world is shame I'm not valuable I'm not good enough all of those things let's just make it a little bit more personal and let's just make it a little bit more personal and let's just make it a little bit more personal and make it better all I'm really not interested in it tough My first step is to design a just perfect here in other words all of those things let's just get going do something that you're proud of what works is to have six Lub brains that you partner with and better you can maybe to want a wasn't gonna help you choose it either way its was it was sevenambient human being with these set a last question and six Gods in the world is the human soul that you rely on this will never find you out is if you control everything, including controlling what people think about you. you have to manage the information they get about you. if there's something on Facebook that says something negative about you, you better go on Facebook and put pages of stuff about how wonderful you are and how about how terrible the person is that said those things about you. You got to information manage and control everybody's thinking about you. Some of you have tried that and it is exhausting and everybody gets kind of tired of you doing that. The next thing that the brain comes up with is the only way people won't see my weakness is I have to be self-sufficient and never need anybody. I got to be able to handle every problem and never need anybody. I got to never depend on anybody else that I'm always strong and people always see how strong I am. They never see weakness or need. And some of you have tried that and that seems to work for a while, but life delivers problems at times that we cannot handle alone. those are some of the early solutions the brain comes up with to try to handle the problem. the first thing that the brain comes up with is the only way people will ever be able to handle the shame issue, the fear of abandonment, trying to hide but still get love and respect. Now I want to take that and I want to transfer that into how does that work itself out. I want you to think about shame and connection with people. one of the things that we talk about all the time is that our brain is wired with a need for connection. from birth, a baby desires to connect with mom and dad. It's built into us. When a baby's born, we desire as parents to connect with it. We have it driven for connection. As we get older, we long for a partner or a deep intimate relationship where we can connect at the deepest level. It is wired into us. , think of shame this way. Shame is the result of not being able to connect. what you might think of a time when you wanted to connect to mom or dad. Maybe you had a problem. Maybe you were hurting. Maybe you had a question and you went to mom and dad wanting to connect and talk about this deep issue that you were struggling with and they didn't reciprocate. They didn't let you connect. They didn't connect back. They were maybe too busy, preoccupied. They just weren't interested. you tried to connect but there was no connection. What did you feel? Must be my fault. Maybe something's wrong with me that caused them to not want to connect with me. shame always results when a child is unable to connect with a significant authority figure in their life. what happens? What happens from that as they grow up is they still long to connect but now they're afraid to connect. they long for that connection but they're afraid if they do connect somebody will find them out. they have conflicting desires in themselves. A longing for connection and a fear of connection at the same time. And they live by this rule. Never be authentic. Always be phony. Always be phony. Because if you're authentic nobody will want to connect with you. Your only chance of connection is if you're phony. But you go that's not going to be real connection. here's what the brain does. It says I wonder if there's a way to have fake connection. I wonder if it's possible to have the feelings of connection without actually connecting with somebody. I wonder if it's possible to have the feelings of connection without really connecting. I wonder if it's possible to have the feelings of connection without relationships. And that's where the brain goes. And guess what? Our culture today offers you a smorgasbord of possibilities of fake connection. What is bar room intimacy? Everybody hugs each other and laughs and smacks each other on the back. And say you're great. I just love you. And how deep did the conversation go? Less than one millimeter deep. Less than one millimeter deep. Less than one millimeter deep. It was superficial. There was no true intimacy. But there were the feelings of intimacy. And that's what fake connection is. on the surface to the limbic brain it seems to be satisfying. But it doesn't really satisfy at a deep level. It leaves you thirsty. Do what the fastest growing addiction in the world is now? Internet. Porn. Why? Fake connection. You get the feelings of a connected relationship without a relationship. What is the purpose for many with a one night stand? I want the feelings of connection without the mess of a relationship. What do many people get through sports? It's the only time where men hug each other and smack each other on the butt. And do all of that. What is going on? We're bros. We're on the same team. I love you buddy. You really? Because you have that warrior spirit. We're on the same team fighting a battle. And we feel close. But it's fake closeness. It's not real intimate connection. we have all kinds of things. How about social media today? Do you realize that most of our kids will text hundreds and hundreds of times? And they'll be , I'm going to text you. I'm going to text you. I'm going to text you. I'm going to text you. And they will text hundreds and hundreds of times a day or message their friends. And they'll say we are connected to each other. But it is superficial. They haven't truly connected. Do there was a study done just a couple years ago about millennial children who have all the texting social media stuff. And what they're finding is that this generation that seems more connected than any other generation the loneliest generation to have yet existed because they don't have true connection. that is the reality of our culture. We have become a culture of fake connection. And that is a result of a shame base. Let's see if we can get the feelings of connection without true intimacy. Now I want to read you something that Dr. Rachel Worsman wrote, which I think is excellent, because it's going to bring the drug picture into this whole connection thing. she's written an article, you can read it, called How Loneliness Fuels Opioid Addiction. She was on TED Talks as about this. But here's what she says. The human brain uses naturally occurring opioids. opioids, we think of morphine, oxycontin, fentanyl, heroin, those are all your opioids. T3s have opioids. They're painkillers, ? But what she says is this. The brain uses naturally occurring opioids to maintain a balance among important brain circuits that shape social thinking and behavior. opioids have a bigger purpose than then deadening pain. They're also managing other circuits in the brain. opioids are a part of the brain that have to do with social interaction, ? Making certain experiences deep social connection feel good. In other words, when you connect with somebody at a heart level and are able to share in an environment where you feel totally safe, totally accepted, you feel good. Opioids are part of what makes that happen, ? Opioids are a part of what makes that happen, ? Opioids are a part of what makes that happen, ? Opioids are a part of what makes that happen, ? Opioids have a lot of different properties, and they're called endorphins. , what the endorphins are, is this is a powerful structure of the brain that is the most powerful and we're going to talk about it in just a moment. The endorphins are two compounds, the most commonly known of which are endorphins, have a similar chemical structure to morphine, heroin, and oxycontin. A lack of strong social connection disrupts this balance amongst the brain circuits. you don't get social connection, all of a sudden, your brain's not getting what it was designed to get, and the opioid thing is all out of whack. it disrupts the balance amongst the brain circuits that use these feel-good chemicals produced by close relationships. Now she takes that in a different direction. When we are really hungry, we will eat anything. , we get that on a physical level. now what she's going to say is, similarly, loneliness creates a hunger in the brain which neurochemically hypersensitizes our reward system. Responding to the pain of loneliness, our brain prompts us to seek rewards anywhere we can find it. in other words, if you don't get connection, your brain gets hungry for opioids. That's what she's saying. If you don't have healthy, intimate, deep connection with at least one other person, your brain is starving. And what she's saying is, if you don't have connection, your brain gets hungry for opioids. And if it is starving for opioids that it can't get from relationships which it was designed to get them from, it will look for them in other places. guess what happens when you find opioid drugs? It says, if we seek it with heroin or opioid painkillers, it will be a heat seeking missile for our social reward system. All of a sudden, our brain will say, who needs people? I just found what I'm looking for. I am no longer hungry. people are set up for opioid addictions, she is saying, because they didn't get connection in childhood. And many of you can relate to that. , then she takes it further. That's in part because of the striatum, which is our autopilot system. I talk about your default setting. , what it is saying is if you start putting opioids from chemicals, not from social interaction into your brain, it changes your brain's default setting. And the drug becomes the default state that keeps the pain at bay and the relief close, overriding the system that would otherwise prompt us to seek humanization. Her gripto talk that sometimes aside from the prevarication to bringing in substances epididymolast it has an alert set itself that motivates you to seek something based on your rang and down. , if you get an adult Sergey Zahle who's going through puberty in childhood, she's going to be strengthened by the production of new medications and they're going to have a Lebanese tax incentive. why is it that many addicts the more they use, the more they isolate. Because number one, medical detox and rehab. We're great at that. Number two, counseling and therapy. Both of those are thriving. What's missing? Number three, social connection. That's been ignored in our recovery world. Now she takes that even further, ? The striatum is what gives us the source of hope here. your striatum is your default setting. what she's now going to say is this. Your striatum, which has been changed to now say, I don't need relationships, I just want drugs, it can be rewired. It can be reprogrammed by starting to give it deep social connections that it longed for in the first place. you can retrain it that it longs for deep social connections again. And if we do that, we need to practice social connections, not reactive behaviors instead of compulsive behaviors. It's not enough to just teach healthier responses to cues from our social reward system. In other words, it's not enough just to give people tools to cope. We have to rebuild the social reward system with reciprocal relationships to replace the drugs which relieve the craving. Our culture and communities either create environments that are either full of things, or they're not. They're full of things that cause addictions to thrive, or full of things that cause relationships to thrive. I think that's powerfully, very said. But the problem, as I come to the end of that, is our culture today is programmed to make addictions thrive. And we, if we are going to help people change, we have to create subcultures which are countercultures, which reintroduce social connections. And that will reprogram the brain. And as the brain is reprogrammed, and people are getting meaningful social connections, the desire for the opioids disappears. And that, I think, is very significant. But here's the trick with shame. Shame says, I want to connect. But as soon as you say, I'm going to try and connect, fear comes up. And it says, -oh, what happens if they find out I'm not perfect? -oh, what happens if they find out who I really am? what you're doing in recovering from shame is saying, I will risk connecting by walking through the fear of being found out. And I will trust that if I connect with the people, it will help me to heal. But that is a scary step. , second thing. How does shame affect relationships? We just did a series on codependency, I don't want to go into great detail. But I want to recap for you how shame affects relationships. one way to understand codependency is it's two shame-based people trying to have a relationship together. That is the best definition of codependency. what happens? It's two people trying to hide who they really are. Two people of masks and walls who are trying to get their needs met, trying to get love and respect without revealing who they truly are. And that's why codependency has been called the dance of two shame-based people. Because they're dancing around, trying to get their needs met, trying to not get the other person too angry. And that is an offense. And that is an ongoing thing. what we have said is shame basically says I have no positive feelings about myself. Because I don't believe I have value or I'm lovable. if I am going to have any positive feelings about myself, they must come from others. I must put on an act, ? But one of the things the brain says is if I'm in a relationship, that proves somebody me. That proves that I must be lovable. therefore, to deal with my shame, the brain says the solution is be in a relationship all the time. Because that will give you proof that somebody loves you, you must be lovable. What then is the problem if you're not in a relationship and you're alone? Your brain goes, -oh, this is proof I'm not lovable. Therefore, I've got to run into a relationship. the brain says, -oh, this is proof I'm not lovable. that's why many shame-based people, when they feel their relationship is falling apart, they don't just break it off and sit alone for a while. They don't break it off until they have somebody else ready. Because they can't be alone because that would prove their deepest fear that they're not lovable. here's how it works out. you've got shame in the rectangle on the left, the blue rectangle. Then people respond. People respond to shame in different ways. some people respond by going to the gray oval at the bottom, the inferior position. I'm a nobody. I'm no good. And they just walk around with zero self-image. Others respond by trying to compensate. And they act they're better than everybody. And they go in the direction of being a narcissist. ? what you need to understand is those two people, they're not just trying to find each other, because what does the superior person want to fix their shame? Not just that I walk around feeling better. I need people to tell me I'm better than others. I need to rescue people. I need to find people who are messed up and help them out. Because what do they do when I help them out? They say, you are wonderful. You are fantastic. And that heals their shame, they think. And then how does it help the person who feels inferior to stay that way? , there's always a knight in shining armor that's going to come around to rescue them. And when they come and rescue them, they go, I'm going to give you all my time. You're worth it. Here, here's some gifts. Let me spend time with you and do stuff for you. And they go, I get much attention from being inferior. This is solving my shame. it all starts great. It all starts great. It all looks it's going to solve the shame. Now, just one thing before I go to the next slide. In the beginning, the superior person sacrifices all their needs for this inferior person. They make the inferior person the center of their universe. ? But that's about to change. Because what happens once they do that, the superiors rescuing the inferior, the inferiors feeling rescued and they're both feeling good, but they're not dealing with their shame in a meaningful way. they're both discontent at a deep level. And pretty soon, the superior person starts to get annoyed with the inferior person and say, why don't you carry your weight around here? I'm tired of doing everything for you. And all of a sudden he makes himself the center of the universe. And the other person has to give up all their and needs. And take charge. And take care of them. And then the inferior person, they go, why am I not getting the attention I used to get? And they start pouting and whining and creating crisis to try to draw the other person back. And you get more and more tension. And then the superior person, they start getting abusive. They start getting controlling. They start thinking, the way to get all the love that I need is to cut everybody else out of that person's life I'm the only one left. Then they'll give me all the love I need. they try to isolate them from all their friends and family. Trying to solve their shame. And then the relationship is drifting. It's falling apart. And both of them start to fear abandonment. they can go back to the honeymoon and say, let's try harder. And let's be on our best behavior. The inferior person can say, I need to keep them happy. I've been too demanding, too needy. I need to do more things for them. And they become a caretaker. And they give up more and more of their . But it's not solving shame. And the relationship keeps breaking down. What I want you to see is as long as shame is not dealt with, you can never have a healthy relationship. Shame has to be dealt with to some degree. And both people have to be dealing with their shame in order for a relationship to have any chance. Now, you might think, r you able to be on your own over time? , it's a long term , it's a supportive , ? It's a non-cheing out to each stands and we live as family. It's allowable to watch it on at the level and to the home. It's really, really important. What a great role is the relationship and the wiring is needed. It's a bigimmune. It holds a structure. It's a rolling crystal that we're that we live within. And as you have to get to you an example, let's just say, between you and me, there's a group of people today. when you're with someone, they have that." What does it take to touch? they do help you. It's a great thing. much shame as the other one. They're just hiding it better. And at some point, if they don't start to see that they have shame too, they will keep needing the other person to be inferior. the inferior person starts to deal with their shame and get healthy. That messes up the way the superior person wants this to operate. And they're not getting the applause that they used to get. they need to sabotage that person's recovery and make them sick again they get the praise that they need. They need to feed the monster. And it doesn't work. here's some of the extreme things that happen. For the inferior person, they become super needy, super clingy. I don't want to lose you. I don't want to lose you. all of a sudden they got all kinds of needs. Some go to a munch house and sit there. Some go to a bar. Some go to a bar. Some go to a bar. Some go to a bar. And I keep going to their end. And everything that happens, all of a sudden, they go to the twenty-three questions that come out of their munch house and give them hope. They're not just afraid to do anything. They're, , patients, what's that gra mammals doing here? I've been inhhhh this area for a Bar. I'm26 meters away from a emergency. reaching out to people that they don't get sick and then they're not , Oh, don't you think you've got a problem. I'm , come on. more sacrifices for you just love me shame trying to get a solution but it never works for the superior person they can just cut off the relationship and move on or some that would be failure they get munchausen syndrome by proxy i will poison you and make you sick that you get rushed to the hospital and then i'll come rushing in to rescue you and people do that and you can watch netflix stuff about that is a real thing that happens some parents do it with children that the child still needs the parent as much as they did when they were really little all a desperate attempt to still be the hero in that person's life those are some of the things that we need to do to save the world from this virus and i want to thank you for being here and thank you for joining us today we are now going to talk about the first part of the program the first part of the program is about the first part of the program we are going to talk about the first part of the program is about the first part of the program which is the second part of the program is about the first part of the program which is the second part of the program things that begin to happen out of shame i'm going to save the last two till next time but i hope that just gives you a little bit of insight into this shame is not just some innocent little thing that's not a big deal shame at the core of your being affects everything in your life negatively that's what i want you to understand and once you understand that you begin to realize it affects me but it affects my relationships and it sets up my relationships to fail and i need to deal with this shame if i'm going to be healthy if i'm going to have a healthy relationship with my kids with my partner with my friends that's how big a deal it is how does it affect a person's relationship with i don't know if you ever thought of that but i would think from my experience and what i do that for most shame-based people it deeply affects their relationship with number one would be why would love me i'm unlovable i don't really believe though i believe it academically that he loves me i don't let myself feel that he loves me that's part one part two sadly for many churches that don't understand shame and the effect of shame they provide ways for people to wear masks and hopefully get love and respect from you can hide the real you just come and serve and keep these rules and do these things then will love you they don't feel that loved them if they didn't do those things but only if they do those things and the question that i have thought about for years and i think needs a clear answer to shame-based people is it's important to get to the point where you see that loves you as you are you do not have to perform or do anything what i wanted to do in the part in this shame series is give you stories that illustrate that tonight i'm going to tell you a story from the life of king david and we've told you a story about the life of king david and we've told you a story about a number of stories from him his life but it's going to be about a guy named mephibosheth now i don't know who would call their kid that but that was his name i even thought of how could i abbreviate that do i call him fib no that doesn't work meth no that's too much meth bosh no that doesn't work we got mephibosheth just to give you the context david's been king for 20 years and he's established as king during that 20 years of his reign the nation of israel has grown eight or conquered eight nations and grown six times its normal size it's expanded and it has just prospered and he has become basically the richest king in the world and he's got all this territory etc it's a time of great popularity a time of great wealth and prestige david is at the top of his game at the pinnacle of his life the question that people have would go this when david became a king the thing that they were told about david was he was a man with 's heart a man after 's own heart has wealth changed him has power changed him has popularity changed him is through his silliness just because these people have poor connections to and their family matters is 1989 Steve said what if you say she did test before him and what do you expect this guy to do to. come on out you're having one in a communist jim that's the kind of moment when you go oh no i'll we wanted to start can we turn this around for some reason before you lady shake hands and come win in the notice at least do this we've got david and his 19 year old brother Steve what's the greatest David call game that the years class but it's me drop that Bereich a dollar start is Kenny Fralick had a million dollars if there was anything that if he needed to know what was important on bookoghlandesainslinks in Minnesota connectivity in Massachusetts is whatession was Jonathan and David and Jonathan were close friends brothers were told and David made a promise to Jonathan that he would take care of his descendants if Jonathan died now after twenty years a being a king he remembers that promise and he says is there still anyone alive in sauce family because I promised Jonathan I'd show them kindness and somebody comes and says Jonathan son Mephibosheth is still alive now you have to understand why that was the dumbest question that people thought David should have asked because in that culture the Kings passed to their sons and their grandson that you had a dynasty who would have been the greatest threat the King David's power as the King of Israel a little guy named Mephibosheth he was the only one left from King Saul's family he was the greatest threat to David's power and David's kingdom for David to say is there still anybody alive that I can be good to people are going David no because the common practice when a king took over a throne is he killed all the descendants of the previous came to make sure there were no threats to his kingdom and David is doing the exact opposite he's wanting to find members of the previous king's family in order to help them when our told about this Mephibosheth guy Saul's son Jonathan had his son Mephibosheth who is a cripple since he was a child when he was five years old the report came from Jezreel that Saul and Jonathan had died in a battle. that's how Saul's reign ended and David became king. 20 years earlier, Saul had been in a war, Jonathan with him. They died in battle. When the news came out that Saul and Jonathan were dead, the nurse of that little boy, Mephibosheth, said, the new king's going to want to kill him. I better hide him. she scooped him up and as she was picked him up and fled and as she hurried away, she dropped him and he became a cripple. He broke his legs. here is a boy who can't walk and he hasn't been able to walk since he's been very, or since five years old. he's 25 now, 20 years of not walking. The next thing we're told about him is that when the nurse scooped him up, she took him to a place called Lodabar. And that is a town that was named No Pasture Land. what she is doing is saying, what is the location in Israel that nobody would ever want to go to? Where there would be no chance of having a job, a farm, an income, because there's, it's a desert, there's no pasture, it's a desert. And she's going to be a slave. And she's going to be a slave. And she's going to be a slave. And she's going to be a slave. And she's going to be a slave. And she's going to be a slave. It is the last place anybody would look. it's the best place to hide because it's the remote, most remote place in all of Israel, Lodabar. That's where you're going, Mephibosheth. he's been hiding in this far away, out in the desert, little village for 20 years. ? nothing has happened. But what I want you to understand is that I think when it says Lodabar, No Pasture Land, it's also using it as a place to hide. It's also using it as a place to hide. It's also using it as a metaphor. It is saying that as Mephibosheth, the favored son of Jonathan, who is destined to be the king of Israel, had to run and flee for his life and became a cripple, he's been a No Pasture Land soul. He's been dead inside. There's been nothing of life that's growing there. His life has been dark and empty and barren. Now I want you to think of that in terms of yourself. Many of you can relate to being Mephibosheth as a five-year-old. You had a good life. You had parents who were wealthy. You had a nice home. You had every privilege that a kid could get. You had it all going for you. You had a bright future ahead of you, just Mephibosheth had. And he would have been chosen as the child in the nation of Israel who would have been chosen as the child of Israel. And he would have been chosen as the child of Israel. And he would have been chosen as the child of Israel. And he would have been the best at succeeding. He would have had the brightest future of anybody else living in Israel. That was his destiny as a five-year-old kid. Twenty years later, no family, no money, no friends, a cripple, dead, isolated, lost everything, no future. It all looks scary. His life is lived in hiding and fear. Sound an addict? Who's lost everything. He's been a Mephibosheth. He's been a Mephibosheth. He's been a Mephibosheth. He's been a Mephibosheth. He's been a Mephibosheth. He's been a son of . He's been a son of . He's been a son of . He's been a son of . He's been a son of . what? How Mephibosheth referred to himself when David finally brought him into the castle? He says, refer to me as a dead dog. And what that meant was, I'm useless. I'm full of shame. I feel I have zero value. I feel my life is a dead dog. And that is what many of you relate to. here is what David says. David's story is saying. How does feel about the Mephibosheths of the world? How does feel about the people who've lost everything and live in fear and brokenness and emptiness with no future prospects? Does love them or say they deserve it? I'm going to wipe them out. And what this story is saying, David has 's heart. how David responds is how feels about the Mephibosheths of the world. watch what happens. David sent for him and brought him to the palace. Now you can imagine when a messenger shows up out in Lodabar and you've been hiding successfully for 20 years and says, Oh, we finally found you. King David wants to see you. You're going, I hope my will's in good shape here because I'm about to be killed. You're filled with dread. And when he came to David, he bowed low to the ground in deep respect. Don't be afraid, David said. I intend to show kindness to you because of my promise to your father, Jonathan. I will give you all the property that once belonged to your grandfather, Saul. That's a lot of property. And you will eat here with me at the king's table. In other words, Mephibosheth, I'm giving you back what you once had. You never have to worry about being cared for again. You never have to worry about a meal again. I will meet your needs now. You are going to finally get taken care of the way you should have all along. Mephibosheth bowed respectfully and exclaimed, Who is your servant that you should show such kindness to a dead dog me? Do you want to know what 's love, feels ? I don't deserve it. And that's what Mephibosheth is feeling. Why are you doing this? It doesn't logically make sense. I don't deserve this kind of love. You should be wanting to kill me, not love me. And from that time on, Mephibosheth ate regularly at David's table one of the king's own son. He didn't get the corner table while the king's sons had the nice table. And he got the scraps. No, he sat with everybody else. He got the royal treatment. here's the word I want you to understand, to understand 's heart. When Moses went up into a mountain, wait, before this time and received the Ten Commandments, he said to , Please show me what you're . Show me your glory. And said, I'm going to hide you in a rock and I'm going to pass in front of you and let you see my glory, my greatness. And then he went on to say, Let me describe to you myself. And what he said is, Here is the core of my character. Here's the essence that all of my character is built on. And guess what it is? It's not anger some people would try to make you think 's core is. It's a word that's called chesed. And chesed is a word that our English language can't fully capture. It's a word that includes, I am committed to you unconditionally forever. a parent would say to a child. It is a word that includes love, delight, forgiveness, grace, mercy. what's mercy? I don't get what I deserve. What's grace? I get what I don't deserve. Instead of getting the judgment I deserve, I get the blessings I don't deserve. what is saying is, You want to get to the core to me? To the core of me? I don't set up relationships based on you earn my love. All my relationships are grace and mercy. Chesed. I overflow in giving people what they do not deserve. A kindness and forgiveness. It talked about a depth of love only known by a parent or a couple that loves each other in a deep healthy way. And that's what it is saying is, 's love. how does feel about the Mephibosheth of the world? Is he saying, You got to earn my love? Is he saying, You better hide your shame and start keeping these rules? He says, I see your shame. I see what you deserve. I see all of that about you. But I want you to know something. You're living in Lodabar. You're empty. All of those things. I'm going to find you and I'm going to love you. And I want to bless you. And I want to fill up your life again. And I want to give you gifts that you can use. I want to give you gifts that you could never earn. And I'm giving them to you all because of grace. And that is the message that comes from .