what we do. It's a bunch of messed up people that to get together and learn about how messed up they are, not to feel sorry for themselves, but that they can start to learn tools for becoming healthy. And we have people here from addiction, people here from childhood trauma, people here from just messed up relationships looking for help and for answers. we tend to do little series that focus on themes that follow this way of thinking. We teach that addiction and a lot of the relationship issues aren't the real problems, they're symptoms of deeper problems. we to understand what are the deeper problems that have resulted in me developing ways of coping with those problems that aren't healthy and are messing up my life today. the series that we're on now is called The Real Problems of Addiction. And it's a series that we're on now that we're learning about where we're going to go from here. And then it's the 3rd one that we're going to be talking about now is, this is our 3rd one is shame. Shame is a word that's not understood . But I would say from my experience as a counselor in the field of trauma and addiction, shame is one of the biggest issues that people have to deal with. And if they don't understand it, it can really mess them up, but to understand it is very painful. shame, just to summarize very briefly, is a core belief that a child develops when they're neglected or abused or abandoned or their needs aren't consistently met, where they think the reason those things are happening to me is because I'm not good enough. Something is wrong with me. And that core belief takes hold deep inside of them. And without them realizing it, it begins to shape how they approach relationships. It begins to shape how they think about themselves, how they treat themselves, how they cope in life. And they do things that make them feel better in the moment and let them survive in the moment. But it messes up all the other things long term. And we've been trying to understand what shame is and how it affects us. And I want to develop it a little bit further tonight. What we are. We began to look at last week was this. Nobody to live with the core belief that something's wrong with me and I'm not valuable or lovable. at a subconscious level, the brain begins to look for a solution to that problem. And it's going to be looking for ways to feel better about themselves, ways to get others to them and respect them, because their belief, core belief is if people get to know the real me, they will abuse me, neglect me, abandon me my parents did. I can't let people see the real me, but I still need people to me and respect me. it begins to develop all kinds of competing priorities, which results in ways of trying to get those needs met. Last week, we looked at how it affects our ability to connect in a healthy way to other people and how it creates a relationship with others. And we're going to talk about that in a little bit. let's get started. Let's get started. let's get started. let's get started. let's get started. let's get started. let's get started. let's get started. Tonight, I want to get give you seven more things that happen as a result of shame in your life that you may not have realized, but I hope will help you realize how big of an issue it is and will help you begin to learn ways of coping that are healthy ways of healing. the first thing I want to talk about is one of the things the brain proposes as a solution to the problem of people's mental health. it's going to be looking for a solution to that problem. to shame walks around thinking I have no value from my internal self it inherently I have no value and that's why I'm not lovable that's why people don't respect me that's why people abandon me and abuse me how do I find value I can't find it internally I need to find my value in externals I'm gonna give you a list of things that the brain devises as ways to find values number one the brain says let's compare ourselves to others let's take my greatest strength and I'll compare myself to everybody else let's say you're a girl or a guy that is just particularly with good looks and a really nice body you are the hottest in your school and now you compare yourself to every girl in the school and you walk away saying I'm better than everybody because I'm hotter than everybody therefore I'm superior I've solved my shame your value now is based on your body other people they don't have a body but they're smart and we now live in a culture where nerds are actually being respected as being wow I wish I was one of them they can make a lot of money you go I'm smarter than everybody here Sheldon on Big Bang and therefore I'm superior to everybody because I can outthink everybody some go that route some go I'm not smart or good looking but I am good at football and I'm better at sports than anybody else I'll compare myself in that area either say I have more money and more things I have better tech toys than other people I've got a bigger house I've got a better job a greater position and we compare ourselves all the time now that seems to work until a prettier girl comes to your school and then all of a sudden you're insecure and all of a sudden there's a competition on and there's a cat fight happening and you got to prove you're smart you're prettier than her and you're better than her that is the challenge is that this solution doesn't really work long term then the pretty person with the great body they hit a midlife crisis around 40 because gravity starts to have an effect then they need extra work done to become a cougar and they can at 40 still attract the 25 year old hunk and they can walk around say I still got it and then at 50 they have another crisis and then they got to become a puma and how it goes you didn't know no I knew those street terms did you that's the challenge when you try to get your value from the external there's always a danger that somebody with better will come along now some people they can't compete in those worlds they say I will find a world where there's lots of rules and I can be a better than everybody and then I can walk around with my nose in the air saying loves me better than you because I'm a better and some of you have met people that and they're not a lot of fun to be around are there say what I can't compete in any of those.? of those arenas but I can be a bad boy and I can be the baddest of the bad boys that will become my identity that will be what gets me respect that's where I'm going to gain my sense of value if you think about it you can compete in any arena let me just give you this in case you've never thought about it how many of you when you were doing lines thought at least they don't inject I'm a better addict than you have haven't you even in addiction you develop ways of comparing that you come out on top compared to other people we have this built into us but it sets it up that I always have to prove I'm better than you and it always leads to insecurity what I say to people is this if your value comes from inside you have nothing to prove and if you have nothing to prove you don't have to worry about losing your position or your value nothing to prove equals nothing to lose and that becomes an important thing for people let me give you another thing outside of comparison think of the first thing in your life as a child that you can remember where you were validated by other people where they laughed at you or they cheered you or they say wow about you some of you might have heard the first compliment you got was you are such a pretty girl others you might got you are funny and guess what happens once that gets into your brain you go there's a lot of that's what is my greatest source of value I got to be funny all the time now often the very first thing you get validated for becomes the greatest thing that you place your value in and therefore one of the hardest things to change next one for many people is they gain their sense of value or dealing with their shame by always helping people who are messed up if i help you that proves i'm healthier than you that proves that i'm better than you will get a lot of people in the helping industry for the wrong reasons and they're just trying to prove their value and fix their own internal shame thing another one is you become your career you become what you do you're not a human being you're a human doer what happens for people that retire many of them fall apart because now they don't know who they are and they feel they have no value because their job is what gave them their sense of value and that is a very big one another one though that is even more common is many get their value from being a parent what happens when a little baby comes into your world they are totally dependent on you they need you that gives you a sense of value then they respect you they put you on a pedestal you're superman in their mind you can do no wrong they love you they adore you they want to spend time with you and that gives you all the validation the love all the stuff that you think is solving your shame but that child is growing up and as they grow up they need you less and less and that creates a crisis within you because if i can't be a mom or a dad and my kids don't need me anymore then where does my value come from what some parents sadly do is they try to keep their children dependent on them they try to keep their children needing them not because it's good for the child but because it keeps them feeling they have value and when their children finally leave home they have a empty nest crisis now what good am i who am I all of those things another one and you've probably met many people this or you're one of them but you pursue validation I don't know if you've ever met somebody that they're kind of spotlight seekers if somebody else in a group of people starts talking and the spotlight goes off of them all of a sudden they're over here oh but i got a story i got a story and they got the spotlight back on them they're spotlight seekers or you tell a story but what their stories are way better than your story it's always a one-up story or they went fishing and they caught a 12 inch fish but they tell you it's three feet and you don't know the truth anymore about their stories because they're always sensationalized why to impress you and if they impress you will respect them more and what does respect mean you will give value to them and that they think will heal their shame or you get something that's not good or something that's not good but what they're talking about and that's what they're talking about and they're talking about and they're talking about and some people that every time they meet you, they got to tell you their latest accomplishment, looking for a pat on the back. And it gets to after a while where you just want to avoid them when you see them coming, because you don't want to hear their latest bragging about what they've accomplished. all of those things are ways the brain is trying to solve shame. what I want you to understand is they seem to work initially, but over time they start giving negative consequences. They don't satisfy, they don't fix the shame problem, because you're trying to solve it through respect from others, but you don't respect yourself. And that is where it breaks down. , let me give you something about this. Where does my value come from? it's. There's one thing to say, I have shame and I feel I have no value. The question is, is that true? Do I have any value inherently, or does my value come only from my externals? there's four things, four types of value, four types of respect, ? Number one is inherent value. Born into every human being is a sense of value. do you realize that babies are a total drain on our economy and our energy, and they take, take, take, take? And we love them to death and value them. Why? They can't do a job. They can't make money. They don't help pay the bills. They just create more bills. They don't give you greater peace of mind. They give you more anxiety. They don't give you greater sleep. They give you less sleep. But why do we value a baby? Because something is born in us that comes with the package of an infant that we say that child has value. Even though they can do nothing, they still have value. we all have that. And what that means is, that's why we treat every person with respect. They might be a total jerk, but they're still a human. And they have. They do not and require a certain amount of respect. There's an equality in all of us called humanity. And that deserves respect. If you think too of a person with severe Alzheimer's, they are a drain on our economy. They're a drain on your energy and time and resources. But we don't go and put them to death because we say they still have value. And that is the challenge that we have. have. inherent value, you don't earn it. It's there. It comes with the package. Second one is value that is due to good character. if you're with somebody who's honest and reliable, somebody who's there for you to support you and walk by you through tough, tough times, you go, you have earned my respect because of your character. that is the second type of respect. Third type are people who make many sacrifices to help others. And you watch what they give. You watch the time and energy they put into people and serve people. And you say, you have earned my respect. you can have a baby and give them respect, but then you can have somebody with great character and great servant heart. And you go, wow, I look up to you. You've earned that. Then there's a fourth type. And that's the badge. That's the position of authority. you could have a policeman who doesn't have any character. He's corrupt. He doesn't do anything good. He's puts all the wrong people arrested, but you still respect them because he's wearing a badge. And you go, if I don't respect the badge, I don't respect the person wearing the badge, but I got to respect the badge. Now let me take that and apply it to the person who's wearing the badge. One of the most common things used in recovery by parents. You got to do what I want because you're supposed to respect your parents. What does that mean? Is that respect one, two, three, or four? Do you realize that all you owe your parents is number one and four. If they haven't earned your respect out of character or the kind of behaviors, they don't deserve that. Kind of respect. You're not required to give it to them, but you still want to give them the respect you would give any stranger that's inherent in all of us. And you want to give them the respect of the badge of their position as parents. But it sure doesn't mean that you don't have to have boundaries with them. It sure doesn't mean you don't have to call them on their stuff. It sure doesn't mean you have to say, you're out of my life for now. You can still say that and have number one and four respect. And that is an important piece to sort out in this whole respect thing. the part I want you to walk away from is this. Shame is I don't respect myself. Now I have to say, do I have value? Yes, I have number one. I have inherent value because I'm a human being. I need to respect myself at a bare minimum for number one. Number two. I don't have to have a lot of respect for myself. I don't have to have a lot of respect for myself. I don't have to have a lot of respect for myself. I don't have to have a lot of respect for myself. Number two and three, the more I have good character and the more I am a giving person and a loving person, I will actually grow in respect for myself. But the first step of healing shame is I respect myself based on number one. I have inherent value. I don't have to do anything. I can be a total jerk, but I still have some value. Let's start there and then we can work on it. I work on two and three as part of our recovery and our respect will grow. , let me just give you one thing more to think about. Take respect. If you were to go to a street level, respect is a huge word. Loyalty is part of that. And what does respect and honor mean on a street level? It is something that you respect me based on fear. You don't. Rat me out. You don't hold me accountable for the bad things I do. You affirm me for the good things and you support me for the bad. You never stand up to me. That's respect. You see how it just took respect and twisted it. what you'll find is shame takes every good quality and it distorts it and it makes it something with the same worth. You can't just say that. It's not a word, but a totally different definition and something unhealthy. And that you can think about. We don't have time to develop. , next thing I want you to think about how does shame affect conflict in a relationship? It does a lot. What happened for you if you grew up in complex trauma is there was conflict, but you notice that when there was conflict, there was a winner and there was a loser. Conflict didn't resolve stuff and reach solutions where everybody benefited and there wasn't a winner or loser. Somebody won and somebody lost and pity the person who lost because if they lost, they didn't just get loser. They got shamed. They got punished. They got made fun of. what happens is I never want to lose a conflict. what do people with shame do? They either. I'm not. I'm not going to lose a conflict. I'm going to avoid conflict at all costs because I got much shame. I'm pretty sure I'm going to lose and I'm not just going to lose. My shame is going to get fed. avoid conflict at all costs or if a conflict starts and it starts to look I might be the loser. Get out of it. Find some way to change the subject. Some way to deflect the conversation. To something else. But don't let it continue because you're going to lose or number three. Become a pro at twisting everything. it's always the other person's fault. That's shame response. do you realize that a narcissist is never wrong in their mind? And a narcissist will twist every conflict to make you wrong and it's never their fault. That is deep, deep shame. Hiding behind twisting reality. And then the fourth one is I will never lose because if you're angry, I will always be angrier than you. And I will trump your anger and you will always lose. shame. What I want you to see is if you both people of shame, conflict will never get resolved in a healthy way. It will always get avoided somehow. And it will always be. It will always be. But if it's avoided somehow, somebody will always get hurt and issues will just pile up. Not resolved. it does over time a tremendous amount of damage. Next, how does shame affect your ability to set boundaries? What does it feel if you say no to somebody and you got lots of shame? You panic and go, I bet you they're not going to me now. They're going to be mad. Because I just said no to them. And I just lost a friend. what does a deeply shamed person believe? I can never say no to anybody because then they won't me. I will say yes to everybody. I will become a people pleaser. And I will let people use me and take advantage of me because I never want anybody mad at me. And how does that work for you? It doesn't. Because over time now you get mad at everybody. But let me take that into today. What you're trained with all of that is if you set a boundary, you feel guilty. You feel you're being selfish. You feel you're doing something wrong. You're being unloving and unkind. shame takes boundary setting and distorts it to be a bad thing. And why you should never do it. But if you don't, you'll never get healthy. You will always be used and abused. And people will just take advantage of you and wear you out and beat you into the ground. Some people, if they're not afraid to say no, they'll let people use them and use them and use them. And then one of two things will happen to try to get them out of the way. Number one is they'll isolate. the only way they can set a boundary is move away from everybody. That doesn't really work very in the long run. The second thing is they explode. And that drives everybody away. It's kind of a boundary setting thing. The problem is once they do that, they feel guilty, they apologize to everybody and let them take advantage of them again. it doesn't work. And that's why you're not allowed to do it. And that's why you're not allowed to do it. And that's why you're not allowed to do it. it doesn't work. part of healing from shame is getting to the point where you say, I respect myself enough that I'm worth fighting for. And I'm worth setting boundaries for. Not to be selfish, but to be healthy. Because that's what healthy is. And that is an important part of the learning process. Number four. Another thing that the brain sometimes does to try and know, Number four. Another thing that the brain sometimes does to try and know, is to see power or feeling a sense of power as a solution to shame. is to see power or feeling a sense of power as a solution to shame. let me give it to you this way. Let's say you got a great big bodybuilder, muscular man, Let's say you got a great big bodybuilder, muscular man, who's a big fighter and everybody's afraid of him. He has power. He walks around and his presence is intimidating. And everybody is just giving him respect. And he that feeling of power. He that feeling he can just say boo to somebody and they'll run. That's power and it's addictive. But it seems to make his shame go away. But it doesn't. Some women get this when they flirt with a guy for the first time. And they realize these guys are weaklings now. They're putty in my hand. I'm powerful over these guys. They'll do whatever I want. And they that power. They hate the attention they're getting. But they the power and it's addictive. And part of dealing with shame is stopping some of the power games. And that is a scary place to go. , let me show you the next thing. , let me show you the next thing. How does shame affect the way I treat myself? Do you realize that shame causes me to treat myself negatively all the time, especially when I failed? And most of it I do subconsciously. here's some of the things that can happen if you've got lots of shame. If you're feeling really happy today, you feel guilty you're having such a good time. That's shame saying you shouldn't be happy. Because you're a screw up. You should be down on yourself. If things are going , you'll sabotage the good stuff in your life and make it all fall apart. That's punishing yourself. Or if things are going , you can start flirting with risky people and risky behavior. You're not fully sabotaging, but you're playing with sabotaging. And if something bad happens, oh . And away you go. That can be a thing. Negative thought loops that play in your head. All the time putting yourself down, telling yourself you're useless, a failure, never amount to anything, nobody will want you. All of that. Then if you fail, you have this thing called a sense of justice. And a sense of justice kicks in and says, you failed, you deserve to be punished. And I'm not going to let you out of the doghouse, which is where you're going, until you've served your time. I ask clients all the time, when you fail, do you put yourself in the doghouse? And they all go, yes. I go, how long do you have to stay in the doghouse before you'll let yourself out? Before you'll treat yourself nicely again? Some will go two weeks, some will say, or two days, some will say a week. That's how much I want to be punished. That's how much I got to punish myself before I think justice has been served. shame taps into that justice system. And it says, because I feel I failed, or I feel a failure, I need to punish myself all the time. Because I feel a failure all the time, therefore punishment all the time. And one of the things that many people do is just focus on their negative thoughts. One of the things that many people do is just focus on their negative thoughts. And they don't look at their good qualities, they don't look at accomplishments, they're just always finding fault with themselves. , two more things, very quickly. Shame, I think, is one of the biggest things to affect mental health today. And I think the mental health world is gradually starting to realize it. And what I've done is on the very left is complex trauma, and it's a spectrum from very severe trauma to mild trauma. , next to that are all the mental health issues that come out. the greater the trauma, the greater the shame. if somebody neglected you, your shame might not be as bad as somebody who was abandoned, or who was sexually abused, or severely physically abused. They're going to feel even worse that it's their fault, that they have no value. Next to that, they're going to have more anger issues. Next to that, they're going to have more depression issues. The greater their trauma, the greater their shame. if you have tons of shame, you're going to have tons of depression because you don't your life. It sucks. And then you're going to have greater anxiety issues. What do people think of me? Is anybody going to love me? All of that comes out of tons of shame. And then I put up other mental health disorders that come out of shame. as shame gets greater, your brain has to deny it more to survive. what happens when a person gets to NPD, or narcissistic personality disorder? They deny that they have any shame. That's the only way to survive. That's the only way to survive. That's the only way they can survive. And the truth is they have more shame than others. But they have to deny it and act superior to others to survive. When you get to a psychopath or a social path, they've got the most shame of anybody in the world. But they are totally shut down about that. the greater the shame, the greater the mental health problems. And that's because the brain has to do greater and greater things that are bizarre to try and survive with that much shame. And then the final result, and this is important to understand, is do you realize the more shame you have, the more people can manipulate you? Do you realize that your mom might be able to manipulate you to do whatever you want, she wants you to do, but if you had zero shame, your mom couldn't manipulate you at all? If you had zero shame, your mom couldn't manipulate you at all? It's your shame that makes you vulnerable to being manipulated. just think about that. When mom wants to get you to do what you want and you said no, and she wants you to get you to change your no to a yes, what does she do? She lays a guilt trip on you. After all I've done for you and all you've put me through, After all I've done for you and all you've put me through, I can't sleep at night because I worry much about you. You're really messing with my life here and all of a sudden you're feeling crappy. , mom, . she begins to play on your shame. Or she withholds love from you. She gives you the silent treatment. And you don't that. That makes you feel all messed up inside and she makes you sit in it for a while. That makes you feel all messed up inside and she makes you sit in it for a while. And then you come begging, mom, I'll do whatever you want. Just love me. Your shame she has just played on. Or she gives you distorted logic that triggers shame stuff. I'm your parent. You should respect me. And we've talked about that. But if you've got lots of shame, that will really bother you. She'll throw your past in your face to trigger shame. if you want to stop giving your mom or your ex much power in your life and take away their ability to manipulate you, deal with your shame. Because if you don't, you're a puppet that they know how to pull the strings. I get asked all the time, What's the big deal about shame? Why do we need to talk about shame much? Are you starting to see it's a big deal? Are you starting to see that, Wow, if I don't deal with this stuff, I am setting myself up for nothing but trouble in life and relationship. In this part of our night, what I've been doing is trying to go to stories that speak to the shame issue. And what many people with shame, without even realizing it, deep down believe, is that we're not going to be able to do anything about it. We're going to be able to do it. And what many people deep down believe is they know academically that loves them, but deep down they're not convinced He really wants them. there's an emotional resistance. There might be an intellectual acceptance, but there's something that just has trouble believing that would love somebody me. I've been looking or presenting stories that speak to that fear, that distorted belief, which is really a lie, that will help us with that. And tonight I want to tell you the story of a lady named Rahab. Rahab was the first real prostitute that we meet in the . And I want to say this up front just to kind of help you understand where I'm coming from. I've dealt with hundreds and hundreds of women and men who've sold their bodies, often just to get drugs, often because they were forced to and pimped out, or they were taken and trafficked, all of those things. But what I have found in dealing with pretty everybody that I know that has been in selling their body is there is a trauma element in their childhood. And part of what they have done in their way of coping has led them down a trail that has resulted in the sale of their body for sex. I would suspect, and I can't say it for sure, but I would suspect that Rahab, who was a prostitute, renowned prostitute, and I'll explain why in a minute, had a lot of childhood trauma. And that was part of her journey, and what that means is there was an element of shame. The second thing that I want you to think about, and I say this very carefully, but when people are involved in the sale, the sale of their body, there has to be something that shuts off in order to endure the added shame they feel for what they lower themselves to do. And some of them are in total denial of that layer of shame, but when you get to know them and they feel safe, and they become more self-aware, they begin to be able to talk about the shame that grew during their time of being involved in prostitution. shame is a common and a deep issue with those who have been involved in prostitution. One of the things that's interesting about Rahab, if the story, Rahab lived in Jericho. when Israel came out of Egypt, out of slavery, they went across the wilderness, they got to the edge and they said, we can't go in, made them wander around in the wilderness for 40 years until that generation died out. The next generation under Joshua comes again to the edge of the promised land, to the Jordan River, and they go across. The first city that they come to is Jericho. Jericho was the first place they entered in this new land of promise. It was a fortified city. It was a city that was prepared for war. It was a city that we're told the walls were thick that they could drive chariots around on the top of the walls. that's how fortified it was. What we know about Rahab is she had a house in the walls. another way to say that is only the very wealthy could afford houses in the walls. Other people lived inside the walls, in their homes, shacks, whatever, but the -to-do had houses in the walls. Rahab was -to-do. I don't know if you remember this story, but her signal that she was a prostitute was she hung a red cord out of her window. everybody walking by could look up and go, just being in Holland in the red light district, oh, there's the prostitute. There's who we go to see. she had the first advantage for advertising her wares because she was in the wall, and she could put a scarlet cord or rope hanging out of her window. she was a prominent, powerful, renowned prostitute who was busier and more respected than other prostitutes. that's a little bit about Rahab. what is going to happen is when they come to the Promised Land, before they cross the river to go across, they send two spies to check out Jericho to get a report of what to expect. ? Those two spies go to Rahab's house. Now, I'll explain that in just a minute, but let me read you the story. Joshua secretly sent out two spies. He instructed them, scout out the land on the other side of the Jordan, especially around Jericho. the two men set out and came to the house of a prostitute named Rahab and stayed there that night. Someone told the king of Jericho, some Israelites have come here tonight to spy out the land. the king sent orders to Rahab, bring out the men who have come into your house, for they have come here to spy out the whole land. Rahab had hidden the two men, but she replied, yes, the men were here earlier, but I don't know where they're from. They left town as the gates were about to close. I don't know where they went. A bold-faced lie. Actually, she had hidden them on the roof, beneath bundles of flax. Before the spies went to sleep that night, Rahab went up on the roof, not to give them sex, but to talk with them. And here's what she says. I know the has given you this land. In other words, I know you're going to win. We're all afraid of you. Everyone in the land is living in terror. We have heard how your made a dry path for you through the Red Sea when you left Egypt. We know that you do not know what you did to the Amorite kings east of Jordan, whose people you completely destroyed. In other words, you defeated armies much greater than you. No wonder our hearts have melted in fear. No one has the courage to fight after hearing such things, for your is a supreme . Wouldn't that be a great report for two spies to take back? Now let me get you to kind of go into the spies in Joshua's mind. He's sending the spies to scout out the land, but he wants to find a place where you can get information. Where would a guy go if they're visiting this city of Jericho and you're a traveling salesperson, a traveling businessman? Where do they tend to go? To prostitutes. And what do they do when they're with prostitutes? They talked. The only time guys talk. And they start talking. And they're starting to share all kinds of different stories. if you want to find out what's going on in a country and a city, who is the best person to talk to? A prostitute. One who would get more traffic than anybody else. that is Joshua's logic. Where do I go to find out what the people are thinking and feeling? Let's find a prominent prostitute. Oh look, hanging out of that window in the land. And on the wall is a scarlet rope. Let's go there boys and find out from her what's going on. that was the thing. Now what is very interesting, and this is the part I want you to really kind of think deeper with me about. After they conquered, after this visit, Rahab said, you're going to defeat us. Please let your save me. And the spy said to her, our will save you if you hang out your rope when we start walking around the city. And when the city falls, your place will not crumble and fall if that rope is hanging out of the window. She believed them. She kept the rope out. They went around the city the seven times. If you remember the seven days, the seven times on the last day, they blew a trumpet and the wall started falling down. All except the wall where Rahab's house was. She was spared because she believed in Israel's . The result of that is she went and lived with the Israelites. She became a member of their community. She married that somebody within that community. , I want you to begin to think with me about all of that. the first thing that is apparent to me is this. This lady, when she talked to the spies, she talked about Israel and the stories that she had heard since she was a little girl about Israel's . to be a prostitute, she had to be 30 to 40. Israel's been wandering around the desert for 40 years. she wasn't even born when Israel came out of slavery in Egypt. , all the stories she's heard as a little girl. She's heard as she's grown up. She's heard people. And what you see is even though nobody was encouraging her towards the true , something was growing in her heart. Something was planting a seed there. And what I have seen is people who have had no connection to , people have been raised in horrific abuse. Some of them have had a seed planted by one person at a young age about and it started to bear fruit. And they thought about it. They thought about it as they've grown up. she has started to believe. Now she has come to a place where she says, this is going to win. I will protect these spies knowing that if she got caught, she could be put to death for treason. her was at such a point that she says, I'm convinced this is going to win. He will protect me. He will protect my life to protect these spies. that was the level of her . Then she comes into the community. Do you think she might have felt out of place? Do you think she walked around feeling everybody was staring at her because they knew her former occupation? Do you think there might have been days where some horny man would come up to her and say, are you still in business? And how awkward she would have felt with all of that? Do you think others would have walked by her with the nose in the air and given her that disgusting, you're nobody, we know who you are, and they judged her? Do you think she might have had times where she was tempted to go back to that way of life and get the attention and easy money that it gave her? Probably all of the above. for her to come into Israel wasn't as simple as saying, come into this place and know how much I love you. It was coming into a place where her shame was going to start to come up. And there was going to be all kinds of things that would come up with that shame. And then I think deep down, she might have questioned at times, all these people say loves me, but does he really? After all I have done my whole life, after the stuff I have done to other people, I have done nothing but to love . And she was , I'm not going to love . I will do anything. I will do anything for the sake of . I will do anything for the sake of . I will do anything for the sake of . I will do anything for the sake of . And this is what does. And , what I have done to other people, I'm not sure could ever forgive me. And I am not sure would make me into something special and want to use me in any special way. Maybe he will give me a job picking up dog poop or something that and make me feel I got some importance, genealogy. Matthew 1, it says, Salmon was the father of Boaz, who was the mother of Rahab. Boaz was the father of Obed, whose mother was Ruth. Obed was the father of Jesse, . Jesse was the father of King David. guess what King David's great-great-grandma was? Rahab. And who came from David? . guess who had in his distant ancestry? Oh, that prostitute. Did want to use a prostitute? You bet. Did he want to give her a little job or a big job? He said, I'm going to give you some very significant people as part of your ancestry who are going to change the world. 1. You're going to get to meet a little guy named David. He's going to change the world. And you're going to have a role in his life. I'm going to trust you with that. And then I'm going to let you have the privilege of being the great-great-great-great-great many, many times grandmother of the Messiah. What that story shows us is that specializes in using messed-up people. He doesn't look down on them. He doesn't give them the little account jobs. He gives them some of the greatest jobs. If you go back through history and you look at the people that made the greatest changes in history, positive changes, most of them came out of severe brokenness. Moses came out of severe brokenness. David came out of severe brokenness. All of them, were used greatly by . And it's says, I will forgive. But more than that, I'm not going to use the past against them. I want to give them a privilege, position, and blessings. And I'm going to take all of that pain and the work it takes to overcome that pain to build into them a character and a giftedness and a skill set that nobody else could ever have. unless they went through that. And that's the skill set I'm going to need to change the world. And as you look at your brokenness and your shame, and you might feel Rahab did when she first came into Israel, and you might wonder if could ever love you or even think of using you. Go back to Rahab. And what's fascinating to me is this in the genealogy of , it mentions four women. And that's all. but other women THAT aren't Eren. in a great way. with burlesquare Until graham, was clothed mostblack to get the color I see. He wants us and has plans for us and wants to.