Because being negative and critical operates as a default setting for most from complex trauma, they're often in that state or that mindset totally unaware that they're there. And it can do a lot of stuff in their brain without them even noticing that they've gone to that negative place. I want to look at what are the things that trigger today slipping back into a negative critical mindset. And let me say again that for most people from complex trauma, if they're in a good headspace, positive, but they slip back into this negative critical headspace, that puts them in great danger. And I'm going to explain that in just a little bit. But what causes. What causes me to go back there without realizing it? The big picture answer is this. Anytime my limbic brain, my emotion center, has predominantly negative emotions, that will put me back into a negative critical mindset. just think of yourself. If you're full of anger, anxiety, you're depressed, you're feeling very guilty, your shame has been triggered, you're bored, you're discontent, you've got a lot of fear happening. If all of those are happening in your brain, or even just a portion of those are happening in your brain, my guess would be that you would become quite negative and critical. that limbic brain, when it gets triggered with negative emotions, its go-to is negative critical thoughts. be aware of that. let me take that into kind of the events that can trigger those negative emotions. if you've just failed, you're embarrassed, you feel terrible about it, I suspect that would take you to a negative critical mindset. Or if you're feeling stressed to the max, overwhelmed, not sure how you're going to keep coping, or if you're frustrated, not just with one thing not working , but with a series of things just aren't going the way you are, or if you are living with a whole bunch of unmet needs. You're lonely, you don't feel accepted, you don't feel part of, you're tired, I suspect you would get negative. Because those are the events that create this limbic brain that is now living with mainly negative emotions. And to the brain that means we're in danger. let's go back to an old tool, which is, let's get negative about it. Now what I want you to understand is this, when you go to a negative, when your limbic brain has negative emotions, and you go to a negative critical mindset, it'll make you feel better instantaneously. But only for a moment. And then it'll actually make things worse. the limbic brain solution is instant gratification, and becoming negative gives some instant gratification, but what it doesn't see is that in the long run, it makes you more discontent, more negative, it puts more pain into your limbic brain, and now it becomes a vicious negative cycle that gradually takes you to a darker and darker place. Let me expand another, another event, or another set of circumstances that can take you to a negative critical mindset. And this one, it doesn't mean that something bad is happening. And that's the important thing to understand with this one. anytime you feel a sense of insecurity, or uncertainty, or you don't have a rock, a person to lean on, you feel kind of all alone, for most people when they get to that state of instability, insecurity, uncertainty, they go to a negative critical mindset. that could be anytime you go through change. Anytime you go to a new job, to a new, you move, you go through just change of any kind, even good change, getting married, all kinds of good things. Any transition, transitions feel you're away from your rock. You're not sure what is solid ground yet underneath you. And you begin to have all these unknowns. What about this? What about this? What about this? And that can take you to a negative critical mindset. it could be relationship instability. It could be job instability. All of a sudden, all of a sudden, there's unknowns. Things aren't secure they used to be. Or it could be a loss. When you lose something that was very important to you, either a person, a part of your life, an event, when that is gone, is taken from you, you go into this time of insecurity, instability, uncertainty, and for many they become very negative. Now there are some other triggers that are important to understand. You will have a negative mindset towards a person if you have a resentment against them. just think of somebody that you might have a resentment against. It's kind of this burning anger, hatred. It doesn't matter what that person does. They could be helping the lady across the street unload her grocery. You choose to see it negatively. You choose to say, their motive is bad. You find fault somehow with what they're doing even though it is all good. Or if you lose respect for somebody, somebody you used to respect you can even think of your dating and you have this respect for a person. You get married, live together, you have a relationship, you have a relationship with somebody, you have a relationship with somebody, you get married, live with them for a while, you lose respect. Now they can do the exact same thing they did when they were dating you, but now you see it negatively. Back then you saw it positively. Now you see everything they do through a negative lens. there are all kinds of things that can trigger this kind of mindset today. part of growing and changing, is being aware of your triggers. Being aware of the needs that being negative and critical seem to meet in your life growing up and maybe your brain still thinks meets today. But what you have to understand from all of that, again, is this is not an innocent problem. It might be easy to try to minimize that it's not doing any damage, it's not a big deal. But think with me through about some of the results of living this way. I want you to understand that it brings about a personality. A personality that will always become negative no matter what is happening. I call it the 90-10 pattern. it goes this. Let's say you were to come into a new program. And when you first come into it you go, wow, this is good. And you see 90 of this program is fantastic. And you rave about it to all of your friends. But then you see a couple things that you don't . What do you then obsess about and focus on? The things that you don't . Which might only be 10 of the program. But as you focus on them and obsess on them, what happens? That 10 grows into 90. And now in your mind this program is 90 bad. Last week it was 90 good. But this week it's 90 bad. Why? Because once you fixate on a negative, you blow it up. Until it takes over. It takes over everything in your thinking. And what that means is it doesn't matter what you do, who you're with, what organization, what program you're involved with. If you have a negative critical mindset, you will gradually find negative in everything. And that will add to your discontent. Now for many people, once they start getting negative, especially if they're an addict, it becomes a very dangerous place for them. They can quickly go from negative to hopeless. this is all negative, what's the point? This is all terrible, I might as give up. Throw in the towel. And for many addicts, to get into a negative place in their thinking, often starts the dominoes falling. And I tell many clients that the earlier you can catch that you're becoming negative, the better, because then you can stop it. But once you slide into that negative headspace, I ask clients, how long can you stay there without doing anything to change it? How long can you stay there before you relapse? And for many people in early recovery, one, two, maximum, one, two, maximum, one, two, maximum, three days. And then they're giving up. That's how serious this can be. But it's not just in the context of addictions that it's a serious issue. This negative critical mindset damages relationships tremendously. Especially intimate relationships. what your partner, what your children, close friends, because of your negative critical mindset, they never feel good enough when they're around you. Because you're always pointing out flaws. And they have a hard time being around you, wanting to spend time with you. Because you're just a prickly porcupine. Others are afraid to open up to you about some of their problems or even good stuff happening in their life because you're going to find fault with it. You're going to judge them. And some people will lie to you because they know you'll criticize them if they tell you the truth. now they can't even have an honest relationship with you. And for you to be negative critical all the time makes you a very unsafe person. And if I, without taking you to too much guilt, but I need to just highlight the damage it does to children. All of the brain cells, the brain research is showing us that children's brains, in order to develop healthy and their whole central nervous system to develop in a healthy way, they need a loving, nurturing environment. That means that they're getting tons of validation. It's a positive, encouraging environment. They need criticism once in a while, but that criticism is given to point them to how they could change and become healthier. It's not just to tear down. It's not to punish. And children, even if they get some criticism, they need to have it balanced out with lots of positives, lots of encouragement. But if you are a negative critical parent, it's very likely that your criticism is going to be more than the value. It's going to be more than the validation your children receive, more than the encouragement that they receive. And that will do great damage to your child. They won't feel they can connect with you. They won't feel safe around you. It creates complex trauma in children because you are not a safe person. There's another result. If you're part of a team or an organization, you're a negative person. Some would refer to you as an energy vampire. whenever there's this dream and lofty goals, you find fault with them all. Whenever there's this new plan that the organization is going to execute and everybody's excited about it, everybody but you is excited about it. And you just suck the wind out of the sails of everybody with a positive goal and a positive idea. And the final negative result is that you really limit your own potential. Because you're afraid to start something, to change, to do new things, because you've got much negative going on in your head. You're looking for excuses to quit stuff before you even start. And you greatly limit your own potential to grow, to be productive, to help others. again, this is such a serious issue. what do we do about it? How do we heal? How do we change this? Start with mindfulness. And what I mean by that is catch yourself. When you catch yourself sliding into being negative and critical about everything, finding fault with everything, be curious about it. And go, what's going on? What's going on here? Why am I going to this negative critical place? And pay attention to the underlying issues that are driving it. that you can then deal with those issues. But if you see yourself sliding into that, stop yourself. Don't feed it. Choose to look at stuff positively. Choose to just shut down going there and obsessing on negative things. And then instead of focusing on all of the flaws and everybody around you, just make a commitment to focus on your own stuff for now. Because it's dangerous for you to get preoccupied with the failures of others. Just focus on your own issues. But then work towards seeing others accurately. that you can learn to trust your gut. And trust your gut again. Look for red flags. You're not doing it to put them down for all the wrong reasons. You're doing it to find safe, healthy people. And what I find with a lot of people, it's hard to know if you're reading the situation accurately when you've been negative for long. have somebody that you trust who's objective that you can say, here's how I see this person. Am I seeing them accurately? Here's how I see this organization. Am I seeing it accurately? Get help in learning how to be an accurate viewer of people and organizations. Then very practically. Start focusing on practicing gratitude, validating people, encouraging people. Now be aware that as you do that, that's going to be totally different from how you've lived for long. it's going to feel weird. It's going to feel awkward, unnatural. You're almost going to feel a bit embarrassed doing that. But get through that. That's . Do it until it becomes something that feels very natural. And then for some of you, you're going to need to set boundaries with negative people. You can't hang around them very often. Because if you spend too much time with them, you find yourself becoming negative. you're going to need some boundaries. For others of you, you might have to stop watching the news for a while or being on social media. Because that just fuels your negativity and your obsession with negative stuff. And then the final thing, don't dwell on your past failures. Learn from them. Change. Grow. But don't keep beating yourself up. Don't keep spending time there. Because that will keep you in a negative headspace towards yourself. And that will spread into all your other relationships. that is becoming healthy in this area. And can I say, this is going to take some work and time. You just don't change this overnight. This is deeply ingrained. This has been operating at a subconscious level. be patient with yourself.