there are these archetypes and types of narcissism and i think it's worthwhile to go through some of them and you've outlined them in your book and written about it previously can you walk us through those the most classical form of narcissism that we most often think about is grandiose narcissism and the grandiose narcissistic person is it's almost our armchair textbook definition arrogant pretentious preening look at me status oriented really cares about appearances interestingly of all the types of narcissism grandiose narcissistic folks kind of have the best outcomes believe it or not because they're not as victimized as long as things are going generally the way the grandiose narcissist wants i'm not saying it's a healthy relationship i mean we're talking about really matters of what's the best worst disease to get kind of thing here it's it's really a matter of though the grandiose narcissistic person really cares about appearances they're very forward facing that's the the the the the the the the the the the the grandiose narcissists and that typically even in the dsm and other diagnostic spaces that formulation of narcissism is what we've classically focused on however especially in the last 10 years there's been more focus on what's called vulnerable narcissism which to me is probably the most important evolution in this conversation the vulnerable narcissistic person is the one we often miss because they're not quite as charming charismatic shiny compelling these are folks who are sullen petulant resentful victimized passive aggressive they are angry at everyone in the world they feel everyone has gotten more than them why me what was me which hun everyone's out to get me and but and also vulnerable narcissistic people may be more sad they may be very socially anxious to somebody looking from the outside in they'll actually say this person's not narcissistic they're kind of not put together actually and they often sort of pull for being rescued a lot of people will get caught up in trying to help them let me give them an opportunity let them give me a let me know if i can help them and they're willing to help me just to be there for them let me give them an opportunity let them give me a let me know what i can do i'm going to help them and i'm going to do it this way and let me let me get them help them and i'm going to get them help them and i'm going to find them how to make them give them a couch to sleep on let me give them let me borrow them let me loan them some money let me help them and then it becomes this literally a vortex a black hole to which you could just keep putting more and more and it's never enough and they sort of remain frozen in time and space no matter how much resource time support encouragement you give them that's the vulnerable narcissist now grandiose and vulnerable narcissism are sort of these kind of these complementary structures if things start going wrong and wrong and wrong and wrong and wrong for the grandiose narcissists they start looking a vulnerable narcissist sullen petulant aggrieved everyone's out to get me if things start going really for the vulnerable narcissists their grandiosity will pop out people are either more primarily grandiose or more vulnerable but circumstances can kind of flip it and sort of make that other form of narcissism show up the next form of narcissism could i insert one thing there just to clear one of the things that i heard you share previously is that vulnerable narcissist even though we talked about women being the brunt of most of the narcissistic behavior the receiving end of it you typically would find when you do find a woman who's a narcissist it's often more likely to be a vulnerable nurse correct is that absolutely vulnerable narcissism is pretty much equally distributed between genders grandiose narcissism is much more prevalent in men malignant narcissism is where we're talking about that more severe narcissism we may still see some of the the charm and the charisma but we can also see a callousness at this point there is a lot of vindictiveness in the malignant narcissist there is the willingness to take advantage of people's vulnerabilities isolate another person the charm is really kind of short-lived and not nearly as shiny as it is with the grandiose narcissistic person malignant narcissistic people be very controlling and the way that might have been the case is that when we talk about the male narcissistic people we're talking about the male narcissistic people we're talking about the male narcissistic people we're talking about even show up in an intimate relationship is they may be intently focused on someone else i want to spend all my time with you why do you want to spend time with your friends aren't you into me they might do things buy them a phone as a gift which is a way they can track them i always tell young people don't ever accept a device or a phone as a gift from someone you're in an intimate relationship with it's very dangerous you maintain your own phone accounts and your own devices always until you are certain that this is a safe relationship but that seems a generous gift you could get from someone it's it's those kinds of things that a malignant narcissistic person would do those relationships can get dangerous and of all the forms of narcissistic relationships physical violence and aggression is going to be most likely to show up in a malignant narcissistic relationship and then secondarily in a vulnerable narcissistic relationship then we get to some interesting forms of narcissism most pointedly the communal narcissist the communal narcissistic person is the i call them sort of the sort of the shirt off your back narcissist these are the people who say i'm the least confident of people these are certain brothers and sisters i tell them to stretch out and you can do Blazer if you need to. seem generous, they seem they're, they're humanitarian, they seem they're trying to save the world, they're out there putting out their message, and that's how they get their validation. some one will say, , there's probably no such thing as human altruism. Isn't anyone trying to do good in the world, trying to do it for some validation, not that's usually not the primary motivation. And the reason we know this is, if a communal narcissist isn't getting lots of cheers and congratulations, and you're great, and you're the best, they will get quite angry. And they will usually take that anger out at family members, again, those very close people and their inner circle. lots of people will say, we'll look at us even a celebrity seeming , , humanitarian, and then someday we'll see the leaks of people saying, Oh, my gosh, this was the most nightmarish thing I've ever worked on. Or their families will say it was hard because we couldn't even get support. Everyone said, our dad was the hometown hero and built a little league field. And yet, we were all suffering with this really cruel problem. And we brought in an American narcissist because if we got that kind of.? Sure we would. We knew her much, we couldn't find out. And what I'd say is, if we spent much time looking at that kind of Actual support, even when she was saying, this is such a big problem with community service, and she was queer at the time, that she would make too much of a script for the audience. And I'd say the nutritional我說, when people go, oh, , look at that grumpy narcissist. This is a Rita and I go, oh, I'm an vuelmet. or something. They always say. social media really blew the communal narcissist kind of up because look at i'm rescuing i'm rescuing the animals on the beach tuesday is elephant rescue day and it's everything is something with them and look at me i'm great i'm rescuing the world and they'll often get to be quite judgmental of others have you done your you're volunteering this week and you're thinking lady i'm not even able to get into bed before 10 o'clock and i make time for other people it's all about them being validated and look and yet i having to run into some of those pta mothers very controlling very invalidating almost very cruel and yet everything's i'm doing it for the kids i'm doing what for the kids invalidating and destroying the souls of the other mothers seems not a great way to do it then we have the self-righteous narcissist the self-righteous narcissist is actually back in the day that was a personality style called the anankastic style it's an obsessive compulsive style not ocd obsessive compulsive but obsessive in terms of obsessive with regard to detail morality these are often people who are very workaholic they are judgmental they are very stingy with money they're punitive they're cold they often live very very rigidly obsessively ordered lives everything just and if anyone messes with their schedule i mean listen if somebody wants to get up in the fourth in the morning and drink goat milk with kale you do you let me keep sleeping and don't judge me for not but these are the folks who will shame other people i live better than you i am better than you and they're they're the folks who'll say if dinner's at six and someone has got sick kids and is quickly trying to get there gets there at 6 15 they'll say dinner is at six and we have eaten and it comes off as very moralistic and cold and if you grew up with a self-righteous narcissistic parent it is a horribly cold method of living that is naturally more moralistic and cold and if you grew up with a self-righteous narcissistic parent it is a horribly cold for the self-righteous narcissistic parent it is a horribly cold that is a really cold thing in the sense not to give you extra credit for everything that you do and you may have to put in the way that you can't accept what you shocked cruel, invalidating experience because a child feels they're constantly being judged. These are kids who will say, we were very anxious as kids because we have to do, as kids, we have to do everything. They said the rooms, it was military, , bedrooms and the schedules were that. And the dining table, the dinner table was such a fraught space. it's a, it's a very, very cold, invalidating, I said, moralistic, judgmental, , work above all, shaming anyone who's had bad luck, the kind of thing , , if you'd saved your pennies, you wouldn't be in the situation, not accounting for they'd lost their job. And then they got very ill. Then there's none of that. if you'd lived your life me, everything would be fine. there's a lack, real lack of empathy and an entitlement in that style that comes out in a really self-righteous way. , it's helpful to hear you break them down because I can imagine that everybody listening is going to be thinking that there's probably at least one person that they know and could even be somebody who raised them. Correct. Very commonly. Very commonly. . And with all of these across the board, I think the thing that is important to remind people is that often, because it takes many years in the case of children, you don't, you don't know that your parent is narcissistic when you're younger, if you were unfortunately raised by somebody that. many people who are listening today who are saying, , , this feels somebody that's in my life. They also, regardless of what type it is, they have felt at some point that they're not necessarily narcissistic. I was wondering because we all have said a lot about what Vivian is saying is that when we were in the moment, when we have our conversations with our parents and they are doing their thing that it's their strength that is they want to do it for others For us, it's the Зoplank challenge for a niño. And that's a lot more effective with our kids, our teens and our babies as . , my son and I, , at one point started feeling that we needed that last geko thing because no, just, and then they keep coming at it because what just happened to them, don't tell me everything happened to them. . way our need for attachment persists it's a very central core part of being a healthy human being that means that when we're in a close relationship and these kinds of invalidating negating manipulative patterns show up our first go-to isn't i'm out of here for many people it's how can i make this work how am i contributing to this and the more we can internalize it within ourselves internalize the blame in ourselves the more we can do something about it the child not only is told by the narcissistic parent that their needs are shamed their emotions are shamed their wants are shamed the child is basically put in a position where they exist to serve the parent rather than the parent protecting them there's no psychological safety in these spaces the child has to become smaller and smaller and smaller and exactly what the parent wants them to be to be able to survive in those systems when that child goes into adulthood guess what they're going to keep doing in relationships be small and not show up in their whole self because they're convinced if i do that i'm not going to be able to be close to someone and that's a very felt sort of an experience the child blames themselves i'm a bad kid i'm i'm not enough i'm not smart enough i'm not good i'm not a i'm not a good kid basically they internalize that becomes their identity the identity of damage the identity of shame the identity of not being good enough because that's in essence what the parent is implicitly communicating that again dogs a person into adulthood but if we can take this on ourselves we can remain attached but if we see it in the other person then that's a call to action saying this isn't good for me and then what then sort of the axiomatically it means we got to go and anything to take away that we got to go we hold on to things hope or what can i do or how can i fix this or almost not seeing it there's a there's a dissociative quality when we're in these relationships there's a phenomenon that dr jennifer fried calls betrayal blindness we conveniently kind of don't see these things that will get in the way of us maintaining an attachment cognitive dissonance we don't it when the pieces don't fit this is my spouse they're really mean to me how do i make the pieces fit maybe they just had a bad day maybe i'm not keeping the house clean enough those things are all put together and by the time it's done a person truly believes they're the bad one and then you throw some gas lighting on top of that and the gas lighting where the narcissistic person's literally telling you not only you're wrong but there's something wrong with you hear that enough you believe it and then the person in the relationship for the other person is the one who's going to be the they were maybe a big contributor or the biggest contributor to the reason that this narcissistic individual was acting the way they are Is step one for them truly just first having awareness that this is even going on in the first place? I think that what is, we're in an era where we feel things in our body before we feel things in our mind. people will say, I am wiped out after spending time with them. , I'm just not feeling . Or I, , once we give name to it, , , you don't feel psychologically safe, ? It's starting to give name to what people are feeling. But people will say, , why am I dreading going? , why am I procrastinating going to their house? In a million different ways, we're telling ourselves, , we don't this relationship, ? We dread the weekends instead of welcoming the weekends, because on the weekends, it might mean you have to spend time with them, ? all of those things are happening, but people don't quite understand it. Listen, I'm sure the reason my YouTube channel has many hits is that at three in the morning, people are typing in, my spouse has no empathy and is super selfish and yells at me a lot. Bing! Dr. Romney's YouTube channel. I'm convinced of that, because I don't think people have a name for it. They're just sort of, what is this? What is going on? It feels heavy. What's going on? And people also feel embarrassed and ashamed about taking that to their friends, because they may not plan on leaving the relationship, and they don't want to sort of create bad buzz about their partner or their family member to people who are close to them. Some people may get into therapy, but a lot of therapists don't know what this is. they might keep focusing on, and I think this is one of the big mistakes of therapy, the therapist often focuses on, what is this? What is this? What is this? What's happening for you? How do you feel? What's your experience? Girl, I don't care about your experience. I need to talk to you about that mess you live with. That's how I do therapy. Wow. , I can say, as somebody in my audience knows me, I can raise my hand and say, I've been there at one point in time in my life, probably a couple of points in time in my life, and my story around that was not wanting to throw the word narcissist around because I thought it's not spiritual or whatever. , I will to things and things that. And not to every other person, none of them I spoken to from the impossible. And I point you before, I'm cut off from those, or not folks , I'm super upset. I'm not talking about ensemble một . This is how I internal matches something they had described to me as a bankroll for a heaviestúимо one thing. They're 가quieraOWN has done a lot of disservice to people in narcissistic relationships who said just that they're wounded i need to be better i'm no they're wounded they need to you they need to take responsibility for their wounds no human being should ever be enlisted into the role of being another person's punching bag or pacifier that is not how life works and there's and the fact of the matter is that the narcissistic person will gobble the other person up alive they don't care i think it's getting your head around that this person actually doesn't care they may even be people say but they're smart they're smart how could they not care i'm why do you think smart and care have anything to do with each other they are smart and they don't care that could be one sentence and i think people struggle with that they'll say they're really good at this or they're such a good cook good they're a good cook and they don't care you can have this as one sentence people are coming up with these strange constructions but i hear you when you say that they do have wounds and people there are many many the vast majority of wounded people out there do the work they go and they face those demons painful as it is and that is something that narcissistic person could do but again they should it's a choice not to and that's the hardest part of all of this but i also know that not everyone can walk away this isn't about walking away that's not the only path forward it's knowing what it is and knowing how to engage in it if somebody never listens to you and you're not talking to them and they're not talking to you and they're not talking to you and they're not talking to you talks over you has no empathy for you has no interest in you laughs and mocks you laughs at you and mocks you when you share an emotion tells you're ridiculous and gas lights you then that really should be a wake-up call that you shouldn't be sharing anything with them you want to talk to them about the weather do it you want to talk to them about the dodger game fine but don't talk to them about anything else i mean it's the equivalent of having a really precious antique in your home and giving it to someone who's drunk and you're not talking to them because you're not doing anything for them what does leaving them drunk mean for us they may not you have gone to work you've lost a job you've got no work you read some wrong stuff but what if someone's there that you can find and you getgraphed to help them come out of that they're why are you feeling this is the thing i don't understand why there is this the mental'm beating me up and waking me up for talking that's might come out it could be anything could be a partner and in those situations one of your big things is don't engage or engage as minimal as possible you just kind of broke it down but i think you have a framework for that it's i say don't go deep don't defend don't defend don't engage don't explain and don't personalize what types of relationships in our life as an example because i'm sure there's some relation that may not work with a spouse true potentially it will absolutely because you're not engaging when they say why don't you ever take out the trash and you're the one taking out the trash every single day three times a day don't defend yourself and say that they're not they're looking for a fight they're not looking for a quantitative breakdown of the number of times you take out the trash they're not interested in the truth they're interested in bashing you when they say why don't you take out the trash more often you're and that's your answer instead of saying but i take out the i took the trash out three times yesterday in fact i know i took it out three times yesterday because it was raining no you don't explain many people won't say but i want them to hear my point of view they're not listening they're not listening and sometimes people say but i want to defend myself i said if you want to then do it then be prepared to be gas lighted or yes an easier way than to become a boozepl over be prepared to be humiliated i'll say do whatever you want but then you need to be prepared for what's going to come back at you and if you don't want those things to happen to you then don't do it and i think people get sad they're saying are you telling me that all there's really left to talk about with my spouse if i don't want to fight with them is the weather and the change of season and that the freeway might be closed this weekend i'm and they'll say i feel really sad and i said let's compare it to what this relationship's been that's been really sad too i think that this don't go deep really shows the relationship for what it is and there's a lot of grief this whole process is riddled with grief people wanted these to be not just marriages that lasted but marriages that were healthy and had depth that they will never have and radical acceptance is you can stay but this is never going to be a deep intimate connected person who stands by your side on tough times relationship it's just not you better start building up the supports who will be your people when you do have your tough days when you need that ride to a chemo appointment when you need someone to talk to you when you get scary medical news when you're going through a dark night of the soul after you retire whatever it may be it ain't going to be the narcissist hey if you this video check out the next clip and i'll see you there