Hi Dr. Ramani, thanks for being here. What is betrayal trauma? betrayal trauma is a series of reactions that a person will experience, psychological and emotional reactions that a person will experience after a pretty significant and protracted period of betrayal in a close or significant relationship. sort of a classical example of betrayal trauma would be, it's not as simple as just somebody cheated on you, but you come to find out they've been cheating on you for 15 years, or they have a child with this other person, or all those years or months or whatever you suspected they were cheating on you, and you keep bringing it up something doesn't feel , and they're don't be ridiculous, and they come up with all these alibis and gaslight and all of that. It's this fallout that comes after somebody who's been significantly betrayed. It could be something that's a public betrayal, that somebody, it's not just an infidelity, but maybe an infidelity with a family member, sleeping with your sister kind of thing, or they're behaving in a really inappropriate way in a public way that could bring shame upon a family. and again, it tends not to be sort of a one-off. It's something that may have been going on for a very long time, and then a person comes to find out there was this whole big story behind the betrayal. It wasn't just this one thing. It was this whole constellation, this whole combination of things that kind of came together, and it's really destabilizing for a person who goes through it. Is the term or phrase betrayal trauma something that's being used by clinicians, or is this a layman's term? No, no, it's something that clinicians use, and it's, I often view betrayal trauma as something that's very tightly linked in with complex trauma. Not necessarily, I mean, it's saying again, complex trauma has some specific kinds of parameters around what that trauma looks , but if the betrayal trauma is long-term enough, it sort of has this really kind of big wide web around it that in essence, a person experiencing betrayal trauma will say, I was married to a stranger, or my family member is a stranger, or it's just sort of this what just happened kind of thing, and a person kind of walking through their life kind of hollowed out looking a deer in the headlights, because it's not just as simple as somebody wakes up one day and says, what, this marriage isn't working anymore. It's not that, and you're kind of sad, . where this come from, but there is no other person. You really truly did grow apart. This is something very, very different, sort of deceit upon deceit upon deceit. I understand that. how does somebody respond differently from a betrayal trauma versus a more standard trauma, we're getting a divorce, that can be traumatic, that's a big deal, but it's not worth it. I mean, I think that what gets tricky is , again, this word trauma, and without belaboring it, is , where do we use it? Somebody's saying, hey, we've been growing up, we're going to be able to do this, we're going to be able to do that. We've been growing apart for years. Now you want to take this job in a different city. I think we need to talk about unbraiding this. Is that traumatic? It's certainly stressful. It's certainly upsetting. I think though somebody waking up one day and recognizing that for years, their trust has been violated in a fundamental way. What they thought life to be simply wasn't life. Things that they suspected, that almost elevates it a bit more to a trauma, because it's much. . It can affect a person standing in the community and on and on. I think that the nature of betrayal, that fundamental violation of trust, people growing apart isn't a violation of trust. It's just sort of things changed. , . what are the symptoms, or what types of behaviors would people experience after experiencing behavioral or after experiencing betrayal trauma? in betrayal trauma, we see a lot of the pattern. similar to what we sometimes see in narcissistic abuse. Rumination, almost a fixation, and sometimes even an obsessiveness, the focus on the situation. What did I miss? What just happened? Going back, looking at old messages, emails, trying to almost construct it. Where did I not see this, ? It's a sort of a feeling almost dissociated from your own instincts. , how did I, did I see this? Didn't I see this? a person literally doubting themselves and blaming themselves sometimes in a really sort of a fundamental way. Tremendous anxiety. A person , you just, you're on edge. You can't believe this has happened. It's a, it's tremendous grief. The life you thought you had, you actually don't have. And there's this massive shift to , , this was my life last week, and this is my life this week. And how could this be happening? It is a, it is, it's confusing. You might even see some of the sort of the patterns you'd see in sort of post-trauma of sort of difficulty concentrating, sort of a feeling of being on edge, being very hypervigilant, very aware of everything that's happening. And betrayal trauma can also be complicated that as the betrayal becomes known, the person may keep getting continually hit with more reports. They'll see something on social media. A friend will say that they saw something. , And then all, if it's a public story, they'll keep having things coming up in the news or the headlines. it's not it's one and done. This keeps happening and a person keeps getting reminded of it. And then again, they may not sleep and have changes in their appetite. it's just awful. It feels awful. I've, I've never experienced betrayal trauma, but I would imagine that I would question everything afterwards. I wouldn't trust anybody. I would go, my boss is probably lying to me. My parents are probably lying to me. Correct. you've lost all trust in anything, everyone. You become suspicious. Suspiciousness really depletes a lot of our bandwidth, ? Because you're always looking, you can't trust anyone. You almost, you're wasting all this time doing due diligence on everything. Even people you thought you could trust and above all else, you stop trusting yourself. And a lot of people going through betrayal trauma feel foolish. how did I, I suspected this. I knew this. I let myself be talked out of it. And this is happening repeatedly. And how did I miss it for many years? And everyone's going to think I'm an idiot because how did I not know this was happening for 10 years? there's, there's a shame that comes from betrayal trauma as . . . Let's move into some solutions for this therapeutic interventions for betrayal trauma. What do we have that you ? I would say if somebody is going through betrayal trauma, step one is to have a place to vent and talk about it again and again and again. What clinicians need to understand is that these are folks who are experiencing a massive sense of trauma. And that's what we're talking about. And we're talking about the sense of injustice and there's nothing we can do to make them feel whole. part of it is letting them, because I do believe that if we let a person say something over and over again, they kind of off gas it. There's a dialysis that takes place. You just, because I think over time, unfortunately, a lot of people going through betrayal trauma, a lot of their social supports do get burned out after a while. I cannot listen to this again. Nothing is changing. . And they may say , I can't, I just can't do this anymore. And that's not going to change. I can't do this anymore. Whereas a therapist that's there, that's what they do. And , and did not judge that. I think that people just need to keep going. And then at some point, even just with the advantage of time, things may shift. But if the betrayal trauma is one where stuff keeps coming up, more revelations are made. It can be a really drawn out process. The other is that the therapy becomes a place to process the grief. A person is grieving a life they thought they had, a relationship they thought they had. It's not nobody's dead. this is a very difficult kind of grief. It's a, it's, , it's, it's something that Pauline boss sometimes calls ambiguous grief is this idea of it's everyone's saying, , I get grief or they're not dead. , you can move on. It would all actually been easier if the person was dead because then it's not, they're not out there living in their new betrayal future kind of thing. Whereas a person going through this is going through very real grief and will keep saying, I can't believe that life is gone. They can't. I mean, they had a life and now they don't have that life to really step for a minute and say, what must that feel ? It's almost having your house burned down. , you had a house and now you don't have a house anymore. And I, I, I think that it's very important that in therapy, that grief process gets to unfold because we often give short shrift to people who are going through betrayal trauma. The world may sometimes look at these as people scorned. Oh, they're just her. Cause this person, no, it's much more than that. fundamental truths in their life have been utterly violated. And it's it's therapy becomes a very patient process of letting the grief unfold of empathizing with the client and recognizing that this is an injustice, that there's no magic wand we can wave over this to make it . And then simultaneous to that, a lot of betrayal trauma is perpetrated by people who are sociopathic, psychopathic, narcissistic, manipulative. And some of it becomes a psycho education about what those personality styles are. And sometimes that helps people have a framework. they don't feel as lost. Are there any therapeutic modalities CBT that you would recommend? I think one of the challenges becomes is that, , CBT is change how you think about this, ? The person's , I don't even know how to think about this. . . Is that, , first of all betrayed you they've betrayed you. And if it's been going on a long time, it feels terrible. I do think that just creating a safe holding space more that we'd see in more of a humanistic style of letting. Person talk it out. I do think an eclectic approach would be absolutely essential here, where you get at some of the historical issues around betrayal. This may be mirroring a betrayal from childhood. Let's say a person's betrayal traumas around infidelity and their one parent cheated on the other that could be really bringing up some old stuff. Acceptance and commitment therapy can also become very important because at the end of the day, it's this is it, , and you've got to, you sort of have to work with doesn't mean you're with it, but you're going to have to work with that. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . There's some things there that can be quite useful. I do think the therapist doing this would be drawing from different models. And if the person has a trauma history, it's really important that it be a trauma-informed perspective. , hey, shout out to all of you out there moving through that betrayal trauma. It's tough. Goodness gracious. And also shout out to all the supporters out there. You guys play a big role. thank you for watching this that you're -informed. Dr. Ramani, thank you much. Thank you. Whatever you're going through, you got this.